There were not merely no grammatical errors , but as a composition it would not have disgraced a gentleman ; the language , though plain , was strong and unaffected , and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer .
" And when ," thought Emma , " will there be a beginning of Mr .
no doubt she had been suffering a great deal : more than any body had ever supposed -- and continual pain would try the temper .
Still , however , though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be leading them forward to the great event .
I think Miss Fairfax dances very well ; and Mrs . Weston is the very best country - dance player , without exception , in England .
which instantly burst forth , had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation .
I will invite your guests ."
" You spent the evening with Mrs .
" If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women , and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them , as you are where these children are concerned , we might always think alike ."
" I would not go away without seeing you , but I have no time to spare , and therefore must now be gone directly .
He sat by her at dinner .
We will not be severe ."
He was silent .
Receive it on my judgment .
There I was quite right .
" You owe me no apologies ; and every body to whom you might be supposed to owe them , is so perfectly satisfied , so delighted even --"
Invite him to dinner , Emma , and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave him to chuse his own wife .
" You speak as if you envied him ."
Mr . Woodhouse could never allow for Mr . Knightley ' s claims on his brother , or any body ' s claims on Isabella , except his own .
Emma demurred .
My right to place myself in a situation requiring such concealment , is another question .
Mr . Churchill was better than could be expected ; and their first removal , on the departure of the funeral for Yorkshire , was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor , to whom Mr . Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years .
I never was more surprized -- but it does not make me unhappy , I assure you .-- How -- how has it been possible ?"
Do not put it into his head .
If the talking aunt had taken me quite by surprize , it must have been the death of me .
I met her frequently at Weymouth .
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when Mrs . Perry drank tea with Mrs . and Miss Bates , or when Mrs . and Miss Bates returned the visit .
I dare say she did not understand me ."
" Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , trying to be lively , but really confused -- " I am in a very extraordinary situation .
There , it is done .
And when you get there , you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you again ; and you had better name an early hour .
He could now , without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise , without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest , give way to all his natural kind - hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr . Frank Churchill ' s accommodation on his journey , through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road , and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold -- which , however , he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till after another night .
my dear , it is not like Hartfield .
As to myself , I am very sorry that you should have been giving way to any feelings -- Nothing could be farther from my wishes -- your attachment to my friend Harriet -- your pursuit of her , ( pursuit , it appeared ,) gave me great pleasure , and I have been very earnestly wishing you success : but had I supposed that she were not your attraction to Hartfield , I should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visits so frequent .
I wish you would try to understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly opposing those , whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his life ."
" For my companion tells me ," said she , " that I absolutely promised Miss Bates last night , that I would come this morning .
" But will there be good room for five couple ?-- I really do not think there will ."
" This is the luxury of a large party ," said she :--" one can get near every body , and say every thing .
" Oh , dear ," cried Harriet , " now I recollect what you mean ; but I was thinking of something very different at the time .
" Poor Mrs . Churchill !
Emma was sorry ;-- to have to pay civilities to a person she did not like through three long months !-- to be always doing more than she wished , and less than she ought !
She had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double - dyed , and therefore only said in reply ,
Never better .-- Don ' t I hear another carriage ?-- Who can this be ?-- very likely the worthy Coles .-- Upon my word , this is charming to be standing about among such friends !
My playing is no more like her ' s , than a lamp is like sunshine ."
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter .
Some people are surprized , I believe , that the eldest was not , but Isabella would have him called Henry , which I thought very pretty of her .
There was instant pleasure in the sight of them , and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound -- for Mr . Weston immediately accosted her with ,
She went on herself , to give that portion of time to an old servant who was married , and settled in Donwell .
" It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer -- but it seems a case of necessity .
Any other situation would have been much less in character .
He proved to me that he could afford it ; and that being the case , I was convinced he could not do better .
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
" Dear Mrs . Weston , how could you think of such a thing ?-- Mr .
They were now approaching the cottage , and all idle topics were superseded .
Her manners , too -- and Mr . Elton ' s , were unpleasant towards Harriet .
Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost ; and all that was amiable , all that ought to be attaching , seemed on Harriet ' s side , not her own .
But after all the punishment that misconduct can bring , it is still not less misconduct .
The greatest kindness you can shew me , will be to let me have my own way , and only say that I am gone when it is necessary ."
The time was coming when the news must spread farther , and other persons ' reception of it tried .
" So obliged to you !-- so very much obliged to you for the carriage ," resumed Miss Bates .
Emma was not required , by any subsequent discovery , to retract her ill opinion of Mrs . Elton .
Most comfortable carriage .-- Oh !
This is great news , indeed .
With men he can be rational and unaffected , but when he has ladies to please , every feature works ."
They are all remarkably clever ; and they have so many pretty ways .
" This is coming as you should do ," said she ; " like a gentleman .-- I am quite glad to see you ."
at three - and - twenty to be the king of his company -- the great man -- the practised politician , who is to read every body ' s character , and make every body ' s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority ; to be dispensing his flatteries around , that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself !
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of your friend .
No , Emma , your amiable young man can be amiable only in French , not in English .
" Conjecture -- aye , sometimes one conjectures right , and sometimes one conjectures wrong .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style -- Candles everywhere .-- I was telling you of your grandmama , Jane ,-- There was a little disappointment .-- The baked apples and biscuits , excellent in their way , you know ; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first , and good Mr . Woodhouse , not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough , sent it all out again .
" I assure you she did .
I wish you would try to understand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly opposing those , whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his life ."
" Aye , I wonder which she will .
" Are you well , my Emma ?"
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
I dare say she did not understand me ."
I could not go away you know , because of the rain ; but I did so wish myself anywhere in the world but there .-- Oh !
We are to walk about your gardens , and gather the strawberries ourselves , and sit under trees ;-- and whatever else you may like to provide , it is to be all out of doors -- a table spread in the shade , you know .
dear , no , never ."
Man ' s boasted power and freedom , all are flown .
I had a letter from him this morning , and he will be with us within a fortnight ."
I hope it does him some service with you ."
" Oh !
--
Miss Smith , the step at the turning ."
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
" I am glad I have done being in love with him .
Knightley .-- Every other part of her mind was disgusting .
" That ' s quite unnecessary ; I see Jane every day :-- but as you like .
To him who has , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought .
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax .
Mr . Woodhouse was resigned .
" Very like Maple Grove indeed !-- She was quite struck by the likeness !-- That room was the very shape and size of the morning - room at Maple Grove ; her sister ' s favourite room ."
He could not say that he was sorry on his own account ; his very cheerful look would have contradicted him if he had ; but he said , and very steadily , that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others , and with considerable kindness added ,
But Mr . Knightley is so very fine a man !"
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded .
Harriet may pick and chuse .
