I doubt whether he will return the compliment , and discover her to be a lady .
" Yes , our good Mrs . Elton .
you were perfectly right !
Emma , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsaid the next moment ."
She was not thoroughly comfortable herself .
They talked at first only of the performance .
I am sure I have not got one half so good ."
It will be giving him so much pleasure !
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
Cole ."
" You are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
I really wish you to call with me .
But she had believed them to be well - meaning , worthy people before ; and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion ?
She hardly wished to have more leisure for them .
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were the parents , but Harriet could not tell .
" With all my heart .
always my kindest friend on every occasion .
They were going to remove immediately to Richmond .
" If you are very kind ," said he , " it will be one of the waltzes we danced last night ;-- let me live them over again .
" Depend upon it , Elton will not do .
" So unreasonably early !"
" I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill .-- I can suppose , however , that I may have underrated him .
" These matters are always a secret , till it is found out that every body knows them .
" I shall never be easy till I have seen some of these places .
Later in the morning , and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o ' clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again .
you forget yourself -- you take me for my friend -- any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver ; but no more of this to _me_ , if you please ."
" Not at all ."
" Nonsense , errant nonsense , as ever was talked !"
While I , to blind the world to our engagement , was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman , was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous caution useless ?-- Had we been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury , the truth must have been suspected .-- I was mad enough , however , to resent .-- I doubted her affection .
I should be sorry to be more ."
Do not you pity me ?"
She had no doubt of what Mr . Weston was often thinking about .
" Yes ," said Jane , " we heard his kind offers , we heard every thing ."
She had often observed the change , to almost the same extent .-- Harriet repeated expressions of approbation and praise from him -- and Emma felt them to be in the closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet .
" Yes , that of course ."
With Mr . Weston ' s ball in view at least , there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things ; but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach -- new carriage , bell - ringing , and all .
He proved to me that he could afford it ; and that being the case , I was convinced he could not do better .
" You did behave very shamefully .
It darted through her , with the speed of an arrow , that Mr . Knightley must marry no one but herself !
He had not time to enter into much explanation .
I wish Jane Fairfax very well ; but she tires me to death ."
The thing would be for us all to come on donkeys , Jane , Miss Bates , and me -- and my caro sposo walking by .
He could not believe her to be encouraging him .
Mr . Weston , his son , Emma , and Harriet , only remained ; and the young man ' s spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant .
The longer she considered it , the greater was her sense of its expediency .
" I cannot imagine ," said Mrs . Elton , ( feeling the indignity as a wife ought to do ,) " I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you , of all people in the world !
Of their all removing to Donwell , Emma had already had her own passing thoughts .
At first , she thought it was a good deal ; and afterwards , but little .
She had not been able to speak ; and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome -- then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ; but it was just too late .
I had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
" Cautious , very cautious ," thought Emma ; " he advances inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure ."
how could it be ?-- Then I must have dreamt it -- but I was completely persuaded -- Miss Smith , you walk as if you were tired .
" That has been a good deal the case , my dear ; but not to the degree you mention .
He had been too much expected by the best judges , for surprize -- but there was great joy .
" We have been calling at Randalls ," said she , " and found them both at home ; and very pleasant people they seem to be .
" I hope you did not venture far , Miss Fairfax , this morning , or I am sure you must have been wet .-- We scarcely got home in time .
What were nine miles to a young man ?-- An hour ' s ride .
You did not enjoy them as I did ; you appeared tired the whole time .
Arthur !-- How do you do ?
and I can account for it only in one way ; you are not yourself , or you could not speak either to me , or of Harriet , in such a manner .
But do come in .
Where is it ?
" Oh !
" Your father will not be easy ; why do not you go ?"
I am only afraid of your sitting up for me .
As to connexion , there Emma was perfectly easy ; persuaded , that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet , he had done nothing .
We all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou , the plainest spoken amongst us ; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other -- a something more early implanted .
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid , was paid to her .
Emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend ; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure , in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection .
Do not we rather surpass your expectations ?
--
But then there is not so clever a man any where ."
He has passed you very often ."
And ( raising his voice still more ) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too .
Always the first person to be thought of !
And putting up her hand to screen her words from Emma --" A congratulatory visit , you know .-- Oh !
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
You look as if you would not do such a thing again ."
They seem very comfortable as they are , and if she were to take any pains to marry him , she would probably repent it .
He was silent .
" I say nothing of which I am ashamed ," replied he , with lively impudence .
You blush , Harriet .-- Does any body else occur to you at this moment under such a definition ?
Now will be the time .
Is not it a good exchange ?-- You consent -- I hope you consent ?"
It did not accord with the rationality of plan , the moderation in expense , or even the unselfish warmth of heart , which she had believed herself to discern in him yesterday .
She has been taught nothing useful , and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself .
As soon as Mrs . Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit Mr . Woodhouse ' s visits , Emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause , resolved first to announce it at home , and then at Randalls .-- But how to break it to her father at last !-- She had bound herself to do it , in such an hour of Mr . Knightley ' s absence , or when it came to the point her heart would have failed her , and she must have put it off ; but Mr . Knightley was to come at such a time , and follow up the beginning she was to make .-- She was forced to speak , and to speak cheerfully too .
I dare say he will come in when he knows who is here .
Mr . Elton , in very good spirits , was one of the first to walk in .
The naivete of Miss Smith ' s manners -- and altogether -- Oh , it is most admirable !
It seemed to him a very ill - judged measure ."
She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury , and was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her .
Mr . Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that to the uncle and aunt , who have brought him up , and are to provide for him !-- Standing up in the middle of the room , I suppose , and speaking as loud as he could !-- How can you imagine such conduct practicable ?"
Perry !-- such attention to Jane !"
They had music ; Emma was obliged to play ; and the thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an affectation of candour , an air of greatness , meaning only to shew off in higher style her own very superior performance .
_She_ could not .
Emma smiled and answered --" My visit was of use to the nervous part of her complaint , I hope ; but not even I can charm away a sore throat ; it is a most severe cold indeed .
Often as she had wished for and ordered it , she had never been able to get any thing tolerable .
