Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost ; and all that was amiable , all that ought to be attaching , seemed on Harriet ' s side , not her own .
I saw the word , and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to the one , and so very distressing to the other ."
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread ; and Mr . Weston had his five minutes share of it ; but five minutes were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind .-- He saw the advantages of the match , and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife ; but the wonder of it was very soon nothing ; and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it .
" Very well .
She was so surprized she did not know what to do .
But Jane , it seems , had a letter from them very lately , and not a word was said about it .
" Pray , Emma ," said he , " may I ask in what lay the great amusement , the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax ?
And then , to prevent farther outrage and indignation , changed the subject directly .
From Frank Churchill ' s face , where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away , he had involuntarily turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind , and too busy with her shawl .
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal ,-- the ball at the Crown .
" And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday , and the Campbells leave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following -- as you will find from Jane ' s letter .
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others ; the very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making independence impossible .
" Might he be trusted with the commission , what infinite pleasure should he have in executing it !
She looked down the Randalls road .
They spoke , therefore , of Mrs . Churchill ' s death with mutual forbearance .
This is meeting quite in fairy - land !-- Such a transformation !-- Must not compliment , I know ( eyeing Emma most complacently )-- that would be rude -- but upon my word , Miss Woodhouse , you do look -- how do you like Jane ' s hair ?-- You are a judge .-- She did it all herself .
I cannot help suspecting him .
There is no use in delay .
Time did not compose her .
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
How trifling they make every thing else appear !-- I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day ; and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ?"
Mrs . Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , & c ., set out in the little room ; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
She will break it to you better than I can .
think a farmer , ( and with all his sense and all his merit Mr . Martin is nothing more ,) a good match for my intimate friend !
to be sure ," cried Emma , " it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
" Me !"
He came four times a day for a week .
Under a bright mid - day sun , at almost Midsummer , Mr . Woodhouse was safely conveyed in his carriage , with one window down , to partake of this al - fresco party ; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey , especially prepared for him by a fire all the morning , he was happily placed , quite at his ease , ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved , and advise every body to come and sit down , and not to heat themselves .-- Mrs . Weston , who seemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired , and sit all the time with him , remained , when all the others were invited or persuaded out , his patient listener and sympathiser .
And Jane declares -- Well !--( as soon as she was within the door ) Well !
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been so .
If she has it now , you have given it .
_She_ certainly had not been in the wrong , and _he_ would never own that he had .
I went in for three minutes , and was detained by Miss Bates ' s being absent .
" She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there .
" I will say no more about him ," cried Emma , " you turn every thing to evil .
" Yes , she would be , but that she thinks there will be another put - off .
Mr . Knightley , I wish you had the benefit of this ; I think this would convince you .
Captain Weston , who had been considered , especially by the Churchills , as making such an amazing match , was proved to have much the worst of the bargain ; for when his wife died , after a three years ' marriage , he was rather a poorer man than at first , and with a child to maintain .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
You mentioned it as what was certainly to be very soon .
Not that I think Mr . Martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education -- and been very well brought up .
It is time for us to be going indeed .
" No -- I have never seen Mr . Elton ," she replied , starting on this appeal ; " is he -- is he a tall man ?"
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble .
I would give any money for it .
" How delighted I am to see you again !
VOLUME III
Thank ye , the gloves do very well -- only a little too large about the wrist ; but Jane is taking them in ."
She was to convey Harriet , and they drove to the Crown in good time , the Randalls party just sufficiently before them .
CHAPTER XV
Jane has heard a great deal of its beauty ; from Mr . Dixon , I mean -- I do not know that she ever heard about it from any body else ; but it was very natural , you know , that he should like to speak of his own place while he was paying his addresses -- and as Jane used to be very often walking out with them -- for Colonel and Mrs . Campbell were very particular about their daughter ' s not walking out often with only Mr . Dixon , for which I do not at all blame them ; of course she heard every thing he might be telling Miss Campbell about his own home in Ireland ; and I think she wrote us word that he had shewn them some drawings of the place , views that he had taken himself .
And he is a very clever boy , indeed .
She doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman , in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax ' s feelings to Frank Churchill .
A piece of paper was found on the table this morning --( dropt , we suppose , by a fairy )-- containing a very pretty charade , and we have just copied it in ."
The style of the letter was much above her expectation .
It was merely a blind to conceal his real situation with another .-- It was his object to blind all about him ; and no one , I am sure , could be more effectually blinded than myself -- except that I was _not_ blinded -- that it was my good fortune -- that , in short , I was somehow or other safe from him ."
Emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend ; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure , in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection .
Mr . Weston , his son , Emma , and Harriet , only remained ; and the young man ' s spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant .
I have seen you only as the admirer of my friend .
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
Oh !
He stopt again , rose again , and seemed quite embarrassed .-- He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed ; and who can say how it might have ended , if his father had not made his appearance ?
When they had all talked a little while in harmony of the weather and Mrs . Weston , she found herself abruptly addressed with ,
He should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet Mr . and Mrs . Elton , and any other of his neighbours .-- He could not see any objection at all to his , and Emma ' s , and Harriet ' s going there some very fine morning .
It is a very cold afternoon -- but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter .-- Ha !
The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before ."
that is quite -- I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting .
" But , Mr . Knightley , she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor , and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for ."
Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
" Oh !
I have nothing more to shew you , or to say -- except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire , and I wish you to see me do it ."
How well she looked last night !"
Conceive what the events of a week have done in that family !
" They would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding - screen from London , which they hoped might keep Mr . Woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company ."
He shook his head with a smile , and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy .
oh !
" You are right .
" And I am quite serious too , I assure you ," replied Mrs . Elton gaily , " in resolving to be always on the watch , and employing my friends to watch also , that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us ."
It was a palpable display , repeated on every possible occasion .
" Don ' t say I was cross .
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury , and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells .-- The Mr . Churchills were also in town ; and they were only waiting for November .
Is not it so ?"
She had heard and seen it all ; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any .
and his wife ' s persuading him to it , out of care for his health -- just what will happen , I have no doubt , some time or other ; only a little premature .
This will be complete enjoyment ; and I do not know , Mrs . Elton , whether the uncertainty of our meetings , the sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to - day or to - morrow , and at any hour , may not be more friendly to happiness than having him actually in the house .
She never mentioned it before , because she would not alarm us .
" Yes : but a young lady -- a bride -- I ought to have paid my respects to her if possible .
And it is not merely the house -- the grounds , I assure you , as far as I could observe , are strikingly like .
He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith , or speaking to those who were close to her .-- Emma saw it .
There must be three months , at least , of deep mourning ; but when they are over , I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for ."
She went to Mrs . Goddard ' s accordingly the very next day , to undergo the necessary penance of communication ; and a severe one it was .-- She had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding -- to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred -- and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis - judging in all her ideas on one subject , all her observations , all her convictions , all her prophecies for the last six weeks .
He praised her for being without art or affectation , for having simple , honest , generous , feelings .-- She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet ; he had dwelt on them to her more than once .-- Much that lived in Harriet ' s memory , many little particulars of the notice she had received from him , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment implied , a preference inferred , had been unnoticed , because unsuspected , by Emma .
Yet she could not bear this silence .
and very much to the purpose .
The plan of a drain , the change of a fence , the felling of a tree , and the destination of every acre for wheat , turnips , or spring corn , was entered into with as much equality of interest by John , as his cooler manners rendered possible ; and if his willing brother ever left him any thing to inquire about , his inquiries even approached a tone of eagerness .
He knows that he is a very handsome young man , and a great favourite wherever he goes ; and from his general way of talking in unreserved moments , when there are only men present , I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away .
To look at her , nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to have secured such a situation .
" Oh !
Could not have imagined it .-- So well lighted up !-- Jane , Jane , look !-- did you ever see any thing ?
" I was very often influenced rightly by you -- oftener than I would own at the time .
