" What does all that signify ?
" This is very true ," said she , " at least as far as relates to me , which was all that was meant -- and it is very shameful .-- Of the same age -- and always knowing her -- I ought to have been more her friend .-- She will never like me now .
The corner of the sofa is very good .
For two or three months longer I shall remain where I am , and as I am ."
The party was rather large , as it included one other family , a proper unobjectionable country family , whom the Coles had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance , and the male part of Mr . Cox ' s family , the lawyer of Highbury .
" Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful , troublesome creature !"
It would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well ."
Mrs . Goddard , and the teachers , and the girls and the affairs of the school in general , formed naturally a great part of the conversation -- and but for her acquaintance with the Martins of Abbey - Mill Farm , it must have been the whole .
They have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ; and Mrs . Martin talks of taking a boy another year ."
" For the present , the whole affair was to be completely a secret .
convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield .
" Emma knows I never flatter her ," said Mr . Knightley , " but I meant no reflection on any body .
It was the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade .
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me , and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will dictate towards her .-- If you think me in a way to be happier than I deserve , I am quite of your opinion .-- Miss W . calls me the child of good fortune .
" A material difference then ," she replied --" and no doubt you were much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives ; but does not the lapse of one - and - twenty years bring our understandings a good deal nearer ?"
I am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you -- and to give you joy in person ."
I was sitting near the door -- Elizabeth saw me directly ; but he did not ; he was busy with the umbrella .
" I will say no more about him ," cried Emma , " you turn every thing to evil .
" Well -- but if any difficulties should arise , my housekeeper is extremely clever ."
" I saw you first in February .
I really am a most troublesome companion to you both , but I hope I am not often so ill - equipped .
There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner .
I went for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se ' nnight ."
Mr . Weston , do not mistake me .
If attention , in future , could do away the past , she might hope to be forgiven .
Emma laughed , and replied ,
There has been a solemn engagement between them ever since October -- formed at Weymouth , and kept a secret from every body .
You mentioned it as what was certainly to be very soon .
You are not just to Harriet ' s claims .
" Your command ?-- Yes ."
Mr . Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express ; and before he could make any reply , Mr . Woodhouse , whose thoughts were on the Bates ' s , said --
those dear little children .
but Jane Fairfax has them both , Harriet ."
To Highbury in general it brought no material change .
It would be an interesting , and certainly a very kind undertaking ; highly becoming her own situation in life , her leisure , and powers .
" I was not quite impartial in my judgment , Emma :-- but yet , I think -- had _you_ not been in the case -- I should still have distrusted him ."
" Did you ever see such a skin ?-- such smoothness !
The invitation was everywhere so well received , that it seemed as if , like Mrs . Elton , they were all taking the scheme as a particular compliment to themselves .-- Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations of pleasure from it ; and Mr . Weston , unasked , promised to get Frank over to join them , if possible ; a proof of approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensed with .-- Mr . Knightley was then obliged to say that he should be glad to see him ; and Mr . Weston engaged to lose no time in writing , and spare no arguments to induce him to come .
But you are too good for that , I am sure ."
It would be a _secret_ satisfaction ; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thing Jane might communicate .
He will connect himself well if he can ."
" Six years hence !
" Aye , very true , my dear ," cried the latter , though Jane had not spoken a word --" I was just going to say the same thing .
" So very kind !"
" Miss Smith !-- message to Miss Smith !-- What could she possibly mean !"
I do not mean to say , however , that you might not have made discoveries ."
" From something that he said , my dear Emma , I rather imagine --"
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
" To be sure .
I like a job of that sort excessively .'
I was sure it could not be far off ; but I had put my huswife upon it , you see , without being aware , and so it was quite hid , but I had it in my hand so very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table .
" Well ," said Mrs . Elton , laughing , " we shall see ."
My dear Emma , we must consider this .
" I can never think of it without laughing .-- She hears us , she hears us , Miss Woodhouse .
" I see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention .
" If I can come again , we are still to have our ball .
I absolutely cannot do without music .
Her second duty now , inferior only to her father ' s claims , was to promote Harriet ' s comfort , and endeavour to prove her own affection in some better method than by match - making .
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have .
" Something has happened to delay her ; some visitors perhaps ."
" Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth .
She was pondering , in the meanwhile , upon the possibility , without seeming very rude , of making her escape from Jane Fairfax ' s letter , and had almost resolved on hurrying away directly under some slight excuse , when Miss Bates turned to her again and seized her attention .
Things must come to a crisis soon now .
Supper was announced .
Dixon in them ."
My dear Harriet , what do you mean ?
Mr . Knightley is coming too .
He is half way to Windsor by this time ."
We shall not be many , you know ."
It had not been forgotten before , but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day .
To know that he has not thrown himself away , is such a comfort !-- She does seem a charming young woman , just what he deserves .
There was no resisting such news , no possibility of avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr . Weston ' s , confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of his wife , fewer and quieter , but not less to the purpose .
" Read it , read it ," said he , " it will give you pleasure ; only a few lines -- will not take you long ; read it to Emma ."
To Isabella , the relief of such tidings was very great , and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father ' s account , who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ; but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls .
I did it because I thought it would offend you ; but , as you made no objection , I never did it again ."
that I had never seen her !"
" Yes , yes -- but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my feelings .
Her curiosity was greatly excited .
" This is the luxury of a large party ," said she :--" one can get near every body , and say every thing .
" I do not know , my dear .
He wished to persuade Mr . Woodhouse , as well as Emma , to join the party ; and he knew that to have any of them sitting down out of doors to eat would inevitably make him ill . Mr . Woodhouse must not , under the specious pretence of a morning drive , and an hour or two spent at Donwell , be tempted away to his misery .
It is my party .
I only want to know that Mr . Martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed ."
Mrs . Elton left them no choice .
I never hear better sense from any one than Robert Martin .
Some people are surprized , I believe , that the eldest was not , but Isabella would have him called Henry , which I thought very pretty of her .
Mr . Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick leather gaiters , and either the exertion of getting them together , or some other cause , brought the colour into his face , as he answered ,
" Yes -- it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill - humour of Mrs . Churchill , which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world ."
but those two lines are "--
Dear , Miss Woodhouse , I was absolutely miserable !
Do not run away with such an idea ."
How that visit was to be acknowledged -- what would be necessary -- and what might be safest , had been a point of some doubtful consideration .
" Thank you .
-- Those were Miss Woodhouse ' s words , were they ?-- And a fine ending -- and there is the letter .
The post - office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
After another short hesitation , " I hope it does not proceed from -- I hope it is not in compliment to Mr .
Well , Mr . Knightley , and so you actually saw the letter ; well --"
It is encouraging people to marry if you make so much of them ."
This , Harriet , is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of us ."
" Upon my word ," said Emma , " I begin to doubt my having any such talent .
