" You were mentioning May .
He felt the going away almost too much to speak of it .
To be sitting long after dinner , was a confinement that he could not endure .
She thought he was often looking at her , and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her to give .
You will have my sketches , some time or other , to look at -- or my tour to read -- or my poem .
Mr . Knightley , always so kind , so feeling , so truly considerate for every body , would never deserve to be less worshipped than now ; and it really was too much to hope even of Harriet , that she could be in love with more than _three_ men in one year .
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill .
Indeed I do you justice , my good friend .
It is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did , and refuse to take Jane ' s answer ; but she positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday , as Jane wished her ; she would wait -- and , sure enough , yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go .
" I do think it is , without exception , the best charade I ever read ."
CHAPTER XVII
She did most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood -- and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half .
cried the good - hearted Mrs . John Knightley .
Her manners , too -- and Mr . Elton ' s , were unpleasant towards Harriet .
No -- till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment , it had never entered my head .
Mrs . and Miss Bates occupied the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - sized apartment , which was every thing to them , the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady , who with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner , wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse , and her more active , talking daughter , almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness , thanks for their visit , solicitude for their shoes , anxious inquiries after Mr . Woodhouse ' s health , cheerful communications about her mother ' s , and sweet - cake from the beaufet --" Mrs . Cole had just been there , just called in for ten minutes , and had been so good as to sit an hour with them , and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much ; and , therefore , she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too ."
They were entering the hall .
He was not hungry ; it would only make him hotter ."
" Has he so !-- Then I know nothing of Mr . Elton .
One cannot have too large a party .
" He appears rough to you ," said Emma , " because you are so very gentle yourself ; but if you could compare him with other papas , you would not think him rough .
This wretched note was the finale of Emma ' s breakfast .
" Oh !
He has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards us all !-- You must let me read it to him ."
He may be very ` aimable ,' have very good manners , and be very agreeable ; but he can have no English delicacy towards the feelings of other people : nothing really amiable about him ."
I know what your drawings are .
You , whom she had known from an infant , whom she had seen grow up from a period when her notice was an honour , to have you now , in thoughtless spirits , and the pride of the moment , laugh at her , humble her -- and before her niece , too -- and before others , many of whom ( certainly _some_ ,) would be entirely guided by _your_ treatment of her .-- This is not pleasant to you , Emma -- and it is very far from pleasant to me ; but I must , I will ,-- I will tell you truths while I can ; satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel , and trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than you can do now ."
Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly .
" Indeed , the truth was , that poor dear Jane could not bear to see any body -- any body at all -- Mrs . Elton , indeed , could not be denied -- and Mrs . Cole had made such a point -- and Mrs . Perry had said so much -- but , except them , Jane would really see nobody ."
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
Dear Miss Woodhouse , he would be thirty years old !"
Mrs . Smallridge is in a great hurry .
A few minutes more , and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house , to get sober and cool , and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over .
Every thing as natural and simple as possible .
I am a great advocate for timidity -- and I am sure one does not often meet with it .-- But in those who are at all inferior , it is extremely prepossessing .
" Well ," said she , " and you soon silenced Mr . Cole , I suppose ?"
Jane did not look round .
They must both have suffered a great deal under such a system of secresy and concealment ."
Oh no ; we all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apart , and were sure of meeting every day ."
She would not marry , even if she were asked by Mr . Knightley .
" Oh !
If he means any thing , it must be to please you .
She had never boasted either beauty or cleverness .
Mrs . Elton had received notice of it that morning , and was in raptures .
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
I am sure I have not got one half so good ."
But " she could never get acquainted with her : she did not know how it was , but there was such coldness and reserve -- such apparent indifference whether she pleased or not -- and then , her aunt was such an eternal talker !-- and she was made such a fuss with by every body !-- and it had been always imagined that they were to be so intimate -- because their ages were the same , every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other ."
Emma returned all her attention to her father , saying in secret --
She was obliged to stop and think .
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait .
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
" I do not wonder , Miss Woodhouse ," she resumed , " that you should feel a great difference between the two , as to me or as to any body .
South End is an unhealthy place .
It was done however .
Her feelings altered towards Emma .-- Offended , probably , by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with , she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant ; and though the effect was agreeable , the ill - will which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma ' s dislike .
Her mind returned to Mrs . Elton ' s offences , and long , very long , did they occupy her .
I had no hesitation in advising him to marry .
Mr . Weston , his son , Emma , and Harriet , only remained ; and the young man ' s spirits now rose to a pitch almost unpleasant .
He should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet Mr . and Mrs . Elton , and any other of his neighbours .-- He could not see any objection at all to his , and Emma ' s , and Harriet ' s going there some very fine morning .
If he were deficient there , nothing should make amends for it .
There are people , who the more you do for them , the less they will do for themselves .
She is a woman that one may , that one _must_ laugh at ; but that one would not wish to slight .
no , no , Henry must have Donwell .
Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother ' s , and must be invited with the rest .
Emma demurred .
It was all right , all open , all equal .
--
It was short , but expressed good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling .
" I am not speaking of its prudence ; merely its probability ."
Mr . Woodhouse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him so , with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate , removed the chief of even Emma ' s vexation .
" You are not vain , Mr . Knightley .
Let me not suppose that she dares go about , Emma Woodhouse - ing me !-- But upon my honour , there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman ' s tongue !"
If they must dance , they had better dance at Randalls .
Let me return your congratulations .-- I assure you that I have heard the news with the warmest interest and satisfaction .-- He is a man whom I cannot presume to praise ."
" So do I ," said Mrs . Weston gently , " very much ."
No , indeed , Miss Woodhouse , you need not be afraid ; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery .
To be sitting long after dinner , was a confinement that he could not endure .
" No , indeed you are mistaken ."
But you , ( turning to Mr . Knightley ,) who know how very , very seldom I am ever two hours from Hartfield , why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me , I cannot imagine .
The pain of his continued residence in Highbury , however , must certainly be lessened by his marriage .
This was all very promising ; and , but for such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut , there was nothing to denote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imagination had given him ; the honour , if not of being really in love with her , of being at least very near it , and saved only by her own indifference -- ( for still her resolution held of never marrying )-- the honour , in short , of being marked out for her by all their joint acquaintance .
He came down by yesterday ' s coach , and was with me this morning immediately after breakfast , to report his proceedings , first on my affairs , and then on his own .
Harriet , who had been standing in no unhappy reverie , was yet very glad to be called from it , by the now encouraging manner of such a judge , and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse , and only wanted invitation , to give the history of her hopes with great , though trembling delight .-- Emma ' s tremblings as she asked , and as she listened , were better concealed than Harriet ' s , but they were not less .
She was deeply ashamed , and a little afraid of his next look .
They walked on .
I only want to know that Mr . Martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed ."
Could a linguist , could a grammarian , could even a mathematician have seen what she did , have witnessed their appearance together , and heard their history of it , without feeling that circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarly interesting to each other ?-- How much more must an imaginist , like herself , be on fire with speculation and foresight !-- especially with such a groundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made .
I am sure of your kind support and aid ."
Who do you think is here ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith ; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte .
He had left them completely frightened ; and Harriet eagerly clinging to him , and hardly able to speak , had just strength enough to reach Hartfield , before her spirits were quite overcome .
This was the fact .
" Charming Miss Woodhouse !
Do let me hear what she says .'"
A few awkward moments passed , and he sat down again ; and in a more determined manner said ,
Jane will be treated with such regard and kindness !-- It will be nothing but pleasure , a life of pleasure .-- And her salary !-- I really cannot venture to name her salary to you , Miss Woodhouse .
As Harriet described it , there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour .
" It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion ," said Mr . Knightley .
my dear sir , as my mother says , our friends are only too good to us .
That was the kind action ; that was the noble benevolence and generosity ; that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth ."
And as I looked at her , though I never saw her appear to more advantage , it struck me that she was heated , and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold .
