I am serious , Miss Woodhouse , whatever your penetrating eyes may fancy -- I am sick of England -- and would leave it to - morrow , if I could ."
Yes , next week .
" More than an attachment , indeed ," resumed Mrs . Weston ; " an engagement -- a positive engagement .-- What will you say , Emma -- what will any body say , when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged ;-- nay , that they have been long engaged !"
" Oh !
In this style she ran on ; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till Mr . Woodhouse came into the room ; her vanity had then a change of object , and Emma heard her saying in the same half - whisper to Jane ,
This is a connexion which offers nothing but good .
CHAPTER XVI
I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs . S . admits our apology , and is not offended .
It makes me envious and miserable ;-- I who have never seen it !
She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please , and given all the consequence she could wish for .
The ball proceeded pleasantly .
" They told me -- that Mr . Martin dined with them last Saturday ."
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance ; and my particular friend , Mrs . Partridge , the lady I have always resided with when in Bath , would be most happy to shew you any attentions , and would be the very person for you to go into public with ."
no ; cautious as a minister of state .
Perry tells me that Mr . Cole never touches malt liquor .
I never knew days fly so fast .
But , Mr . Knightley , how could you possibly have heard it ?
I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad .
Mr . Elton was only too happy .
In general he was judged , throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury , with great candour ; liberal allowances were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man -- one who smiled so often and bowed so well ; but there was one spirit among them not to be softened , from its power of censure , by bows or smiles -- Mr . Knightley .
It would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well ."
Well , I shall bring Jane with me -- Jane and her aunt .-- The rest I leave to you .
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied .
" Did you ever have your likeness taken , Harriet ?"
Now do not you feel that you had ?
It was not closed , however , it still remained ajar ; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation , she hoped to make it practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoining room .
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
Upon the whole , she was very persuadable ; and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort -- how certainly Mrs . Goddard , if not Mrs . Bates , might be depended on for bearing him company -- Mr . Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter ' s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spending the whole evening away from him .
Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet ' s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose , for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr . Elton ' s being a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ; and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints , she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet ' s side , as there could be any occasion for .
He wanted to marry well , and having the arrogance to raise his eyes to her , pretended to be in love ; but she was perfectly easy as to his not suffering any disappointment that need be cared for .
We do not often look upon fine young men , well - bred and agreeable .
What !-- engaged to her all the winter -- before either of them came to Highbury ?"
" Your gallantry is really unanswerable .
As to her illness , all nothing of course .
" I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say any such thing .
So very obliging of Mr . Frank Churchill !
Mr . Knightley , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant .-- Did you ever see such dancing ?-- Was not it delightful ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal to it ."
Emma , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsaid the next moment ."
Enscombe is in Yorkshire ?"
From Frank Churchill ' s face , where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away , he had involuntarily turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind , and too busy with her shawl .
" And now that I understand your question , I must pronounce it to be a very unfair one .
The word was _blunder_ ; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it , there was a blush on Jane ' s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible .
She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes , in talking and listening , and forming all these schemes in the in - betweens , that the evening flew away at a very unusual rate ; and the supper - table , which always closed such parties , and for which she had been used to sit and watch the due time , was all set out and ready , and moved forwards to the fire , before she was aware .
All looked up to them .
Invite them both ."
yes , quite indispensable ."
Frank Churchill ' s character was not desperate .-- She was his own Emma , by hand and word , when they returned into the house ; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then , he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow .
Poor old Mrs . Bates , civil and humble as usual , looked as if she did not quite understand what was going on .
I really am a most troublesome companion to you both , but I hope I am not often so ill - equipped .
But James will not like to put the horses to for such a little way ;-- and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ?"
It was very wrong of me , you know , to keep any remembrances , after he was married .
" Leave it to me .
That ' s one of the ladies in the Irish car party , not at all like her .-- Well , I declare --"
" Much , indeed !"
But Mr . Woodhouse -- how was Mr . Woodhouse to be induced to consent ?-- he , who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as a distant event .
Vanity working on a weak head , produces every sort of mischief .
She stopped to breathe .
Emma was extremely glad to see him -- but there was a degree of confusion -- a number of embarrassing recollections on each side .
Mr . Churchill ' s loss would be dreadful indeed .
CHAPTER XVI
You are too bountiful !
Surprizes are foolish things .
She was not so materially cast down , however , but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives .
I cannot keep my eyes from it .
Let me hear any thing rather than what you are all thinking of .
" It is not fair ," said Emma , in a whisper ; " mine was a random guess .
" And mine ," said Mr . Knightley warmly , " is , that if he turn out any thing like it , he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing !
And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind .
Every friend of Miss Taylor must be glad to have her so happily married ."
Emma had feelings , less of curiosity than of pride or propriety , to make her resolve on not being the last to pay her respects ; and she made a point of Harriet ' s going with her , that the worst of the business might be gone through as soon as possible .
I have thought only of you .
It confesses that you have long understood me ."
Mrs . Weston had , of course , formed a very favourable idea of the young man ; and such a pleasing attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense , and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation which her marriage had already secured .
To speak , she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness .
This is meeting quite in fairy - land !-- Such a transformation !-- Must not compliment , I know ( eyeing Emma most complacently )-- that would be rude -- but upon my word , Miss Woodhouse , you do look -- how do you like Jane ' s hair ?-- You are a judge .-- She did it all herself .
She was , of course , the object of their joint dislike .-- When they had nothing else to say , it must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse ; and the enmity which they dared not shew in open disrespect to her , found a broader vent in contemptuous treatment of Harriet .
" I am afraid we must be running away ," said Emma , glancing at Harriet , and beginning to rise --" My father will be expecting us .
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing , but if he were criticising her behaviour , she did not feel afraid .
Why was the evil so dreadfully increased by Harriet ' s having some hope of a return ?
I have often talked to her a good deal .
If you think he will come , I shall think so too ; for you know Enscombe ."
When we talked about him , it was as clear as possible ."
I have no reason to think ill of her -- not the least -- except that such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and manner , such a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body , is apt to suggest suspicions of there being something to conceal ."
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
He was silent .
" If I understand your brother , he only means so far as your having some thoughts of marrying .
" But your father is not going so far ; he is only going to the Crown , quite on the other side of the street , and there are a great many houses ; you might be very much at a loss , and it is a very dirty walk , unless you keep on the footpath ; but my coachman can tell you where you had best cross the street ."
" We must ask Mr . and Mrs . Weston to dine with us , while Isabella is here ."
" You saw her answer !-- you wrote her answer too .
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry - out upon her extreme good luck .
Can it be Neptune ?
" But you have not seen so much of the world as I have .
" Such sweet lines !"
the good Bateses -- I am quite ashamed of myself -- but you mention them in most of your letters .
It would be impossible to say what Emma felt , on hearing this -- which of all her unpleasant sensations was uppermost .
To guess what all this meant , was impossible even for Emma .
my mother ' s spectacles .
A Miss Hawkins -- that ' s all I know .
" Mrs . Gilbert does not mean to dance , but there is a young lady disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing -- Miss Smith ."
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse , I could deserve nothing from either .
