She read the concluding lines , and was all flutter and happiness .
In spite of her vexation , she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous , that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet , which Mrs . Weston had just gone through by herself .
when a gallant young man , like Mr . Frank Churchill ," said Mr . Knightley dryly , " writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse , he will , of course , put forth his best ."
" Dear me !-- How should I ever have borne it !
Emma had hardly expected them : for Mr . Weston , who had called in for half a minute , in order to hear that his son was very handsome , knew nothing of their plans ; and it was an agreeable surprize to her , therefore , to perceive them walking up to the house together , arm in arm .
He came down by yesterday ' s coach , and was with me this morning immediately after breakfast , to report his proceedings , first on my affairs , and then on his own .
Will not it be beautiful in her dark hair ?"
I could not think about you so much without doating on you , faults and all ; and by dint of fancying so many errors , have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least ."
" What news do you mean ?"
Elton ?"
Indeed I do you justice , my good friend .
She was not thoroughly comfortable herself .
" Yes , they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London .
He could be no judge , however , of the evil he was holding cheap .
But here is my father coming : you will not object to my reading the charade to him .
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal , and came back all the better -- grown quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to them , take an interest in their employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
Much better employed talking to the young ladies .
I have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure .
Every body last night said how well you played ."
It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love with a proper object .
Elton !"
But for Harriet ' s sake , or rather for my own , and as there are no husbands and wives in the case _at_ _present_ , I will break my resolution now ."
She speaks a little too quick .
" You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match .
Her regard was receiving strength by invariable praise of him , and her regrets kept alive , and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins ' s happiness , and continual observation of , how much he seemed attached !-- his air as he walked by the house -- the very sitting of his hat , being all in proof of how much he was in love !
With him it was most unnatural .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
replied Emma , unable to guess , by look or voice , whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint .
Oh !
You are too bountiful !
" It comes to the same thing .
She knows nothing herself , and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing .
And how could it possibly come into your head ?"
Of very important , very recordable events , it was not more productive than such meetings usually are .
No indeed !-- There was not a hint of Mr . Martin .
" There it is .
She could have made an inquiry or two , as to the expedition and the expense of the Irish mails ;-- it was at her tongue ' s end -- but she abstained .
Jane will be treated with such regard and kindness !-- It will be nothing but pleasure , a life of pleasure .-- And her salary !-- I really cannot venture to name her salary to you , Miss Woodhouse .
Mr . Churchill , independent of his wife , was feared by nobody ; an easy , guidable man , to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew .
" I am concerned to hear of it .
Emma had done .
I always deserve the best treatment , because I never put up with any other ; and , therefore , you must give me a plain , direct answer .
With respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
It really was so .
I am exceedingly obliged to you , Mrs . Elton , I am obliged to any body who feels for me , but I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer .
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
The visit was of course short ; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being " elegantly dressed , and very pleasing ."
" Oh !
my dear , as Perry says , where health is at stake , nothing else should be considered ; and if one is to travel , there is not much to chuse between forty miles and an hundred .-- Better not move at all , better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get into a worse air .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
She had hardly been able to speak a word , and every look and action had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness .
Either because he did not dance himself , or because the plan had been formed without his being consulted , he seemed resolved that it should not interest him , determined against its exciting any present curiosity , or affording him any future amusement .
Had the same behaviour continued , Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views ; not being aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of .
Well , ( returning to the room ,) I have not been able to succeed .
Every part of it brought pain and humiliation , of some sort or other ; but , compared with the evil to Harriet , all was light ; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken -- more in error -- more disgraced by mis - judgment , than she actually was , could the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself .
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration .
In that respect Mrs . Weston ' s loss had been important .
He will connect himself well if he can ."
" I do not know what your opinion may be , Mrs . Weston ," said Mr . Knightley , " of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith , but I think it a bad thing ."
He always moved with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory , but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance .
To him who has , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought .
She would not look again .
Must go and speak to Dr . and Mrs . Hughes for a moment .-- How do you do ?
But you really frightened me .
I dare say Mr . Knightley will be so kind as to meet him ."
Mrs . Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa .
said John Knightley .
You would not come in and sit with us in this comfortable way , if you were married ."
" She must have some motive , more powerful than appears , for refusing this invitation ," was Emma ' s conclusion .
But poor Mrs . Bates had a bad cold about a month ago ."
She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do : but she does not know the parties so well as I do .
But I cannot imagine how I could be so off my guard .
This is a matter of mere common politeness and good - breeding , and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry ."
The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates .
But then Patty came in , and said it was you .
If we feel for the wretched , enough to do all we can for them , the rest is empty sympathy , only distressing to ourselves ."
I think it is the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight .
They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
and I always thought you meant it ."
Mr . Churchill had made a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost ; and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum ."
It was now the middle of June , and the weather fine ; and Mrs . Elton was growing impatient to name the day , and settle with Mr . Weston as to pigeon - pies and cold lamb , when a lame carriage - horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty .
What has Mr . Frank Churchill done , to make you suppose him such an unnatural creature ?"
" I do so wonder , Miss Woodhouse , that you should not be married , or going to be married !
yes -- she will have her own room , of course ; the room she always has ;-- and there is the nursery for the children ,-- just as usual , you know .
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience , his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him .
" Low , I am afraid , sir , very low ," answered his son ;--" but we shall be indulgent -- especially to any one who leads the way ."
Most comfortable carriage .-- Oh !
She must see more of him to understand his ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable .
Now Emma could , indeed , enjoy Mr . Knightley ' s visits ; now she could talk , and she could listen with true happiness , unchecked by that sense of injustice , of guilt , of something most painful , which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her , how much might at that moment , and at a little distance , be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself .
I would not have you too sanguine ; though , however it may end , be assured your raising your thoughts to _him_ , is a mark of good taste which I shall always know how to value ."
do you recommend this side ?-- Well , I am sure , Mr . Churchill -- only it seems too good -- but just as you please .
Alas !
Miss Fairfax , I dare say , would not have me if I were to ask her -- and I am very sure I shall never ask her ."
But one morning -- I forget exactly the day -- but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_ _evening_ , he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket - book ; it was about spruce - beer .
But Harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and Emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
Miss Woodhouse , do talk to me and make me comfortable again ."
Mrs . Weston kissed her with tears of joy ; and when she could find utterance , assured her , that this protestation had done her more good than any thing else in the world could do .
In fact , it does not concern you -- it concerns only myself ,-- that is , we hope .-- Humph !-- In short , my dear Emma , there is no occasion to be so uneasy about it .
" My dear Emma ," said he at last , with earnest kindness , " do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been speaking of ?"
