" Business , you know , may bring money , but friendship hardly ever does ."
You wrote me word of it three months ago ."
" No , no ,"-- he gravely replied .--" Don ' t ask me .
" If so , you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_ .
They walked together .
Depend upon it , he will be much farther from doing _you_ justice .
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
Emma , your infatuation about that girl blinds you .
To be sitting long after dinner , was a confinement that he could not endure .
As a walking companion , Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her .
It does not bear talking of ."
What a disappointment it would be !
Harriet Smith ' s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing .
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent , and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing .
Her aunt is a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome .
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day .-- Shocking plan , living together .
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
` I am sure you must be ,' said he , ` and I will send you another supply ; for I have a great many more than I can ever use .
You must remember it now ?"
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walked after her to church .
Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the reasonings and soothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could give .
The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room , Emma found herself obliged to turn from him for a few minutes , and listen to Mr . Cole .
Harriet was to be there in the evening , and the Bateses .
" I have known her from a child , undoubtedly ; we have been children and women together ; and it is natural to suppose that we should be intimate ,-- that we should have taken to each other whenever she visited her friends .
His rank in society I would alter if I could , which is saying a great deal I assure you , Emma .-- You laugh at me about William Larkins ; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin ."
He talked of Harriet , and praised her so warmly , that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add .
She had half a mind to resent ; but an instant ' s observation convinced her that it was really said only to relieve his own feelings , and not meant to provoke ; and therefore she let it pass .
Frank Churchill ' s confession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for more than a word in passing .
_I_ think seriously of Miss Smith !-- Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl ; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled .
It had a most favourable aspect ; and , for half a minute , Emma felt the glory of having schemed successfully .
He has passed you very often ."
" Never mind , Harriet , I shall not be a poor old maid ; and it is poverty only which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public !
I wish you could have heard her honouring your forbearance , in being able to pay her such attentions , as she was for ever receiving from yourself and your father , when her society must be so irksome ."
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
The word was discovered , and with a faint smile pushed away .
I do not by any means engage for its being returned .
and that ' s so dreadful !"
" Yes , here I am , my good friend ; and here I have been so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth is , that I am waiting for my lord and master .
Have you any thing to send or say , besides the ` love ,' which nobody carries ?"
If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased , she would rather stay at home ."
papa , we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they married .
There is safety in reserve , but no attraction .
" Exactly so -- The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth -- I have not a doubt of your success .
" You were speaking ," said he , gravely .
Every thing turns out for his good .-- He meets with a young woman at a watering - place , gains her affection , cannot even weary her by negligent treatment -- and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him , they could not have found her superior .-- His aunt is in the way .-- His aunt dies .-- He has only to speak .-- His friends are eager to promote his happiness .-- He had used every body ill -- and they are all delighted to forgive him .-- He is a fortunate man indeed !"
Not a creature knowing it but themselves -- neither the Campbells , nor her family , nor his .-- It is so wonderful , that though perfectly convinced of the fact , it is yet almost incredible to myself .
" But what are you in doubt of ?
" We should not like her so well as we do , sir , if we could suppose it ; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor ' s advantage ; she knows how very acceptable it must be , at Miss Taylor ' s time of life , to be settled in a home of her own , and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision , and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure .
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
Harriet , who was standing at some distance , and with face turned from her , did not immediately say any thing ; and when she did speak , it was in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma ' s .
Mr . Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make ; which was exactly the case ; for though very much gratified by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not liking to resist any advice of her ' s , he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;-- but Emma , too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear him impartially , or see him with clear vision , was very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of its being " very cold , certainly very cold ," and walked on , rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls , and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening .
Ambition , as well as love , had probably been mortified .
It was short , but expressed good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling .
With the view of passing off an awkward moment , Emma smilingly said ,
They went in ; and while the sleek , well - tied parcels of " Men ' s Beavers " and " York Tan " were bringing down and displaying on the counter , he said --" But I beg your pardon , Miss Woodhouse , you were speaking to me , you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_ _patriae_ .
It ought to be no recommendation to _you_ .
She was not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness ; and with this resemblance of her father , she inherited also much of his constitution ; was delicate in her own health , over - careful of that of her children , had many fears and many nerves , and was as fond of her own Mr . Wingfield in town as her father could be of Mr . Perry .
I long to make apologies , excuses , to urge something for myself .
She has been gone longer already than she intended ."
As for _his_ going , Emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
If one could ascertain what the chief of them -- the Coles , for instance .
" Have you any idea of Mr . Knightley ' s returning your affection ?"
By that time , it was beginning to hold up , and I was determined that nothing should stop me from getting away -- and then -- only think !-- I found he was coming up towards me too -- slowly you know , and as if he did not quite know what to do ; and so he came and spoke , and I answered -- and I stood for a minute , feeling dreadfully , you know , one can ' t tell how ; and then I took courage , and said it did not rain , and I must go ; and so off I set ; and I had not got three yards from the door , when he came after me , only to say , if I was going to Hartfield , he thought I had much better go round by Mr . Cole ' s stables , for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain .
" Mrs . Elton , I suppose , has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes --"
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were the parents , but Harriet could not tell .
I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark of respect to him on the present occasion .
" Ah !
" You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs . Weston for my feelings ," said Emma ; " were you to guess her to be _eighteen_ , I should listen with pleasure ; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using such words .
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry - out upon her extreme good luck .
" Me !
Shall I call upon them ?
" Very true , Miss Woodhouse , so she will .
It was on the wedding - day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
" Charming Miss Woodhouse !
This was her history ; and particularly interesting it was to Mr . Woodhouse , who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry , and only regretted that she had not done it .
In the present instance , it was sickness and poverty together which she came to visit ; and after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or advice , she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the scene as made her say to Harriet , as they walked away ,
" She will not be surprized , papa , at least ."
Elton , and Miss Hawkins !-- Good morning to you ."
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
you amuse me excessively .
You will never go to Swisserland .
very true indeed .
" And do you see her , sir , tolerably often ?"
" Good God !"
I thought I had seen you first in February ."
But I hope , Miss Woodhouse , that supposing -- that if -- strange as it may appear --.
I know Mr . John Knightley too well -- I am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body .
To Isabella , the relief of such tidings was very great , and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father ' s account , who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ; but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls .
" I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy ," said Mr . Knightley presently , " though I have kept my thoughts to myself ; but I now perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet .
He always moved with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory , but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance .
" How odd you are !
I should like to see Emma in love , and in some doubt of a return ; it would do her good .
At this moment Mr . Weston appeared at a little distance from the window , evidently on the watch .
There is safety in reserve , but no attraction .
" A new neighbour for us all , Miss Woodhouse !"
While he was so dull , it was no wonder that Harriet should be dull likewise ; and they were both insufferable .
You think so , do not you ?"
" This is too bad ," cried Emma , as they turned away .
With an alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively , with the real good - will of a mind delighted with its own ideas , did she then do all the honours of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters , with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests .
I cannot help suspecting him .
