What Mr . Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject , being the accumulation of the ostler ' s own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at Randalls , was , that a messenger had come over from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill -- which messenger , however , had been no more than was expected ; and that Mr . Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines , containing , upon the whole , a tolerable account of Mrs . Churchill , and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early ; but that Mr . Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly , without waiting at all , and his horse seeming to have got a cold , Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise , and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by , the boy going a good pace , and driving very steady .
I think it is the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight .
This was not submitted to by either lady .
Mr . Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make ; which was exactly the case ; for though very much gratified by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not liking to resist any advice of her ' s , he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;-- but Emma , too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear him impartially , or see him with clear vision , was very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of its being " very cold , certainly very cold ," and walked on , rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls , and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening .
We were very wrong before ; we will be cautious now .-- He is your superior , no doubt , and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature ; but yet , Harriet , more wonderful things have taken place , there have been matches of greater disparity .
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
" You get upon delicate subjects , Emma ," said Mrs . Weston smiling ; " remember that I am here .-- Mr .
I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towards myself ; but , otherwise , I should loudly protest against the share of it which that woman has known .-- ` Jane ,' indeed !-- You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name , even to you .
His admiration was certainly very warm ; yet she thought , but for Mrs . Weston , it would not have struck her .
But did you never see him ?
Mr . Weston would not be blind to folly , though in his own son ; but he is very likely to have a more yielding , complying , mild disposition than would suit your notions of man ' s perfection .
oh !
I give you credit for it .
But now , she would rather it had not happened .
She never stopt till she had gone through the whole ; and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong , yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed -- and he had suffered , and was very sorry -- and he was so grateful to Mrs . Weston , and so much in love with Miss Fairfax , and she was so happy herself , that there was no being severe ; and could he have entered the room , she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever .
Name your day , and I will come .
What are you proud of ?
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
It might be weeks , it might be only a few days , before the horse were useable ; but no preparations could be ventured on , and it was all melancholy stagnation .
It really was so .
" That will do ," said he , when it was finished , thinking aloud -- " you have sung quite enough for one evening -- now be quiet ."
There is such perfect good - temper and good - will in Mr . Elton as one cannot but value ."
From Frank Churchill ' s face , where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away , he had involuntarily turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind , and too busy with her shawl .
Knightley ?-- Who was so useful to him , who so ready to write his letters , who so glad to assist him ?-- Who so cheerful , so attentive , so attached to him ?-- Would not he like to have him always on the spot ?-- Yes .
She is a flatterer in all her ways ; and so much the worse , because undesigned .
Mr . Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe , which allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his command , as well as the route and the method of his journey ; and she listened , and smiled , and congratulated .
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself -- very ill in many ways ,-- but it was not so much _his_ behaviour as her _own_ , which made her so angry with him .
Soup too !
No doubt it had been from jealousy .-- In Jane ' s eyes she had been a rival ; and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulsed .
" It seems like madness !
" I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet , to be tempted ; Mr . Elton , you know , ( recollecting herself ,) is out of the question : and I do _not_ wish to see any such person .
They continued together with unabated regard however , till the marriage of Miss Campbell , who by that chance , that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs , giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior , engaged the affections of Mr . Dixon , a young man , rich and agreeable , almost as soon as they were acquainted ; and was eligibly and happily settled , while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn .
" So very obliging of you !-- No rain at all .
When people come into a beautiful country of this sort , you know , Miss Woodhouse , one naturally wishes them to see as much as possible ; and Mr . Suckling is extremely fond of exploring .
Come , my dear Emma , let us be friends , and say no more about it .
` You _must_ _all_ spend your evening with us ,' said she --` I positively must have you _all_ come .'"
" Very true , my love , very true .
It was a right thing to do .
" I went only to the post - office ," said she , " and reached home before the rain was much .
" She must be very lively , and have hazle eyes .
She knows I would not offend for the world .
She could not bear to see him suffering , to know him fancying himself neglected ; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr . Knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated -- she could not proceed .
It spoke such perfect amity .-- He left them immediately afterwards -- gone in a moment .
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
As a counsellor she was not wanted ; but as an approver , ( a much safer character ,) she was truly welcome .
It is not in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of Knightley ."
In that very room she had been measured last September , with her two friends .
He shook his head with a smile , and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy .
If he would act in this sort of manner , on principle , consistently , regularly , their little minds would bend to his ."
" I wonder he did not remember the book "-- was all Harriet ' s answer , and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure which Emma thought might be safely left to itself .
Weston .-- " Very well , I thank you , ma ' am .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
Perry !-- such attention to Jane !"
Trust to me ."
At the same time , I will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint , because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware .
The party did not break up without Emma ' s being positively secured for the two first dances by the hero of the evening , nor without her overhearing Mr . Weston whisper to his wife , " He has asked her , my dear .
I was quite surprized ;-- very glad , I am sure ; but really quite surprized .
But " she could never get acquainted with her : she did not know how it was , but there was such coldness and reserve -- such apparent indifference whether she pleased or not -- and then , her aunt was such an eternal talker !-- and she was made such a fuss with by every body !-- and it had been always imagined that they were to be so intimate -- because their ages were the same , every body had supposed they must be so fond of each other ."
Not more than five couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful , and she found herself well matched in a partner .
my sins , my sins !-- And I had plenty all the while in my pocket !-- One of my senseless tricks !-- I deserve to be under a continual blush all the rest of my life .-- Well --( sitting down again )-- go on -- what else ?"
Emma , on reaching home , called the housekeeper directly , to an examination of her stores ; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note .
Woodhouse , who had already taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens , where no damps from the river were imagined even by him , stirred no more ; and his daughter resolved to remain with him , that Mrs . Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need .
I have been silent from surprize merely , excessive surprize .
I will have nothing to do with it .
Surprizes are foolish things .
.
When this was over , Mr . Woodhouse gratefully observed , " It is very kind of you , Mr . Knightley , to come out at this late hour to call upon us .
She always travels with her own sheets ; an excellent precaution .
--
said Emma , as soon as she could speak .
Another song , however , was soon begged for .
So she thought at first ;-- but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need not be put off .
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction , comfort , and delight to me , to hear what a musical society I am got into .
" Then , my dear Isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
Emma would not agree to this , and began a warm defence of Miss Fairfax ' s complexion .
I should have expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell ."
I think it is so .
No indeed I am not ."
Of pride , indeed , there was , perhaps , scarcely enough ; his indifference to a confusion of rank , bordered too much on inelegance of mind .
Were not you struck ?
And as for objects of interest , objects for the affections , which is in truth the great point of inferiority , the want of which is really the great evil to be avoided in _not_ marrying , I shall be very well off , with all the children of a sister I love so much , to care about .
_Courtship_ -- a very good hint .
She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife , though growing very like her ;-- _she_ spoke some of her feelings , by observing audibly to her partner ,
Vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be doing something , good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs . Weston , indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general ; he became liable to all these charges .
do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax ' s sensations from you , or from any body else .
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr . Weston .
" I hope he does ," replied Mr . Knightley coolly , and resuming the letter .
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
" You may _say_ what you chuse -- but your countenance testifies that your _thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine ."
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten days ' end , her nephew ' s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan .
" You had better explore to Donwell ," replied Mr . Knightley .
Presently the carriage stopt ; she looked up ; it was stopt by Mr . and Mrs . Weston , who were standing to speak to her .
Colonel Campbell , you know , is quite our angel .
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
exclaimed Mr . Knightley loudly and warmly ; and with calmer asperity , added , a few moments afterwards , " No , he is not her equal indeed , for he is as much her superior in sense as in situation .
Harriet Smith ' s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing .
The delightful assurance of her total indifference towards Frank Churchill , of her having a heart completely disengaged from him , had given birth to the hope , that , in time , he might gain her affection himself ;-- but it had been no present hope -- he had only , in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment , aspired to be told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her .-- The superior hopes which gradually opened were so much the more enchanting .-- The affection , which he had been asking to be allowed to create , if he could , was already his !-- Within half an hour , he had passed from a thoroughly distressed state of mind , to something so like perfect happiness , that it could bear no other name .
It was the end of an old pencil ,-- the part without any lead .
" I doubt its being very clever myself ," said Mr . Weston .
" Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced .
