" Might he not ?-- Is not it possible , that when enquiring , as you thought , into the state of your affections , he might be alluding to Mr . Martin -- he might have Mr . Martin ' s interest in view ?
She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality .-- How shocked had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates !
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society .
She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please , and given all the consequence she could wish for .
The affection of the whole family , the warm attachment of Miss Campbell in particular , was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of Jane ' s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements .
" And after all , five couple are not enough to make it worth while to stand up .
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure .
" Mrs . Elton , I suppose , has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes --"
He sat really lost in thought for the first few minutes ; and when rousing himself , it was only to say ,
After these came a second set ; among the most come - at - able of whom were Mrs . and Miss Bates , and Mrs . Goddard , three ladies almost always at the service of an invitation from Hartfield , and who were fetched and carried home so often , that Mr . Woodhouse thought it no hardship for either James or the horses .
" Ah !
Then , if you please , you shall send it all to Mrs . Goddard ' s -- I do not know -- No , I think , Miss Woodhouse , I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield , and take it home with me at night .
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure , excited by such tender consideration , replied ,
I hope you do not retract what you then said ."
But on the other hand , as Emma wants to see her better informed , it will be an inducement to her to read more herself .
I am not afraid of your not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs . Goddard .
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
He had met her before breakfast as he was returning from a walk with his little boys , when it had been just beginning to rain .
A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill .
You do not think I could mean _you_ , or suppose Mr . Knightley to mean _you_ .
.
" Whom are you going to dance with ?"
" Very bad -- though it might have been worse .-- Playing a most dangerous game .
She was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other .
" But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax !"
Mr . Elton must smile less , and Mr . John Knightley more , to fit them for the place .-- Emma only might be as nature prompted , and shew herself just as happy as she was .
" She must have some motive , more powerful than appears , for refusing this invitation ," was Emma ' s conclusion .
" Such an eye !-- the true hazle eye -- and so brilliant !
His admiration was certainly very warm ; yet she thought , but for Mrs . Weston , it would not have struck her .
The answer was only in this short note :
Frank Churchill turned towards her to listen .
I know , indeed , that he is so , and , as such , wish him well .
I was very much pleased with all that he said .
" I should not wonder ," said Mrs . Weston , " if Miss Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination , by her aunt ' s eagerness in accepting Mrs . Elton ' s civilities for her .
" There is so pointed , and so particular a meaning in this compliment ," said she , " that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr . Elton ' s intentions .
I was there -- one of the party ."
" Worse than I had supposed .
She promised , however , to think of it ; and pretty nearly promised , moreover , to think of it , with the intention of finding it a very good scheme .
But I thought he would have staid now , and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned .
CHAPTER X
" Well , my dear , and did you get there safely ?-- And how did you find my worthy old friend and her daughter ?-- I dare say they must have been very much obliged to you for coming .
" I am perfectly satisfied ," replied Emma , with the brightest smiles , " and most sincerely wish them happy ."
" Thank you .
to look on , while repeated attentions were offering to another woman , before her face , and not resent it .-- That is a degree of placidity , which I can neither comprehend nor respect ."
" You know Miss Fairfax ' s situation in life , I conclude ; what she is destined to be ?"
It was no more than a wish .
Here ceased the concert part of the evening , for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers ; but soon ( within five minutes ) the proposal of dancing -- originating nobody exactly knew where -- was so effectually promoted by Mr . and Mrs . Cole , that every thing was rapidly clearing away , to give proper space .
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred .
" No -- I shall not stir .
Harriet really wished , and had wished some time , to consult a dentist .
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father , he would have contrived it between September and January .
" No , indeed ," cried Emma , most happy to begin , " not in the least .
Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeavour to forget it ."
He did speak yesterday -- that is , he wrote , and was refused ."
I wanted to know a little more , and this tells me quite enough .
Yes , I understand the sort of mind .
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl , which she trusted , with such frequent meetings at Hartfield , was foundation enough on his side ; and on Harriet ' s there could be little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy .
She could not endure to give him the true explanation ; for though her suspicions were by no means removed , she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them .
" Yes , here I am , my good friend ; and here I have been so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth is , that I am waiting for my lord and master .
He praised her for being without art or affectation , for having simple , honest , generous , feelings .-- She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet ; he had dwelt on them to her more than once .-- Much that lived in Harriet ' s memory , many little particulars of the notice she had received from him , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment implied , a preference inferred , had been unnoticed , because unsuspected , by Emma .
The preparations must take their time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on , and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in uncertainty -- at the risk -- in her opinion , the great risk , of its being all in vain .
Oh !
" I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to - morrow .-- Mr .
" Is not she ?
" There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart ," said she afterwards to herself .
She and Mr . Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the same time .
" Now ,"-- said Emma , when they were fairly beyond the sweep gates ,-- " now Mr . Weston , do let me know what has happened ."
Making - up indeed would not do .
" Encouragement !-- I give you encouragement !-- Sir , you have been entirely mistaken in supposing it .
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
Wax - candles in the schoolroom !
As she reflected more , she seemed but to feel it more .
then , don ' t speak it , don ' t speak it ," she eagerly cried .
Acquit me here , and procure for me , when it is allowable , the acquittal and good wishes of that said Emma Woodhouse , whom I regard with so much brotherly affection , as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as myself .-- Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight , you have now a key to .
so silly -- so satisfied -- so smiling -- so prosing -- so undistinguishing and unfastidious -- and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me , I would marry to - morrow .
I am sure , a month ago , I had no more idea myself !-- The strangest things do take place !"
His letters disgust me ."
" It is not now worth a regret ," said Emma .
" I rather wonder that it was never made before ."
I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea has been given me by circumstances ; and if Mr . Knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on Henry ' s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?"
` If you must go , my dear ,' said I , ` you must , and I will say you are laid down upon the bed .'"
for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits , and Mr . Elton ' s time is so engaged ."
A very friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax , she hoped , might lead the way to a return of old feelings .
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella ' s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
How do you do , Miss Smith ?-- Very well I thank you .-- And I begged Mrs . Weston to come with me , that I might be sure of succeeding ."
Knightley !-- Mr .
You begged hard to be commanded to come ."
It was as much as Emma could bear , without being impolite .
It was , indeed , a highly prized letter .
Emma scarcely heard what was said .-- Her mind was divided between two ideas -- her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax ; and poor Harriet ;-- and for some time she could only exclaim , and require confirmation , repeated confirmation .
Elton ."
Yes , Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which , because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days .
He fancied bathing might be good for it -- the warm bath -- but she says it did him no lasting benefit .
Her own behaviour had been so very improper !
" I have very little to say for my own conduct .-- I was tempted by his attentions , and allowed myself to appear pleased .-- An old story , probably -- a common case -- and no more than has happened to hundreds of my sex before ; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up as I do for Understanding .
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
" Oh !
A little while ago , every letter to Isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties ; dinners at Mr . Cole ' s , or balls at the Crown .
