" No -- I cannot call them gifts ; but they are things that I have valued very much ."
Well , Mr . Knightley , and so you actually saw the letter ; well --"
" I will answer for it , that mine thinks herself full as clever , and would spurn any body ' s assistance ."
said Jane , shaking her head ; " dear Mrs . Elton , who can have thought of it as I have done ?"
Mr . Martin is now awkward and abrupt ; what will he be at Mr . Weston ' s time of life ?"
He had been too much expected by the best judges , for surprize -- but there was great joy .
" Has he so !-- Then I know nothing of Mr . Elton .
Half a dozen natural children , perhaps -- and poor Frank cut off !-- This , though very undesirable , would be no matter of agony to her .
He seemed by this connexion between the families , quite to belong to her .
" Certainly , if you wish it ;-- but you are not going to walk to Highbury alone ?"
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance , and was beyond the reach of Mr . Weston ' s hint .
" What an excellent device ," said he , " the use of a sheepskin for carriages .
" And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbells ."
Frank turned instantly to Emma , to claim her former promise ; and boasted himself an engaged man , which his father looked his most perfect approbation of -- and it then appeared that Mrs . Weston was wanting _him_ to dance with Mrs . Elton himself , and that their business was to help to persuade him into it , which was done pretty soon .-- Mr . Weston and Mrs . Elton led the way , Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed .
Here Mr . Weston joined them , and on hearing what was proposed , gave it his decided approbation .
In one respect Mrs . Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first .
And the same may be said of Mrs . Jeffereys -- Clara Partridge , that was -- and of the two Milmans , now Mrs . Bird and Mrs . James Cooper ; and of more than I can enumerate .
His civilities to the other ladies must be paid ; but his subsequent object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering , and the walk he had had for nothing .
The error has been all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give , I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell .'"
It is not likely that I _should_ , considering what I have been used to .
Mr . Perry did say so .
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when Mrs . Perry drank tea with Mrs . and Miss Bates , or when Mrs . and Miss Bates returned the visit .
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping .
It was the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade .
I could not have visited Mrs . Robert Martin , of Abbey - Mill Farm .
She heard of her walking with the Eltons , sitting with the Eltons , spending a day with the Eltons !
She had reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold , and it was desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint before the gentleman ' s return .
I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself , and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them ."
One cannot resolve upon them in a hurry .
you would not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at this rate ."
I shall talk about it to him ; he will settle for me ; he will help me out of all my difficulties .'
You must grant me that ."
She says I fidget her to death ; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same .
Mrs . Cole had many to agree with her ; every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell , and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made ; and there were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way , and still listen to Mrs . Cole .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
He and Mrs . Weston were both dreadfully desponding .
" No , sir ," replied his son , laughing , " I seem to have had it from nobody .-- Very odd !-- I really was persuaded of Mrs . Weston ' s having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe , many weeks ago , with all these particulars -- but as she declares she never heard a syllable of it before , of course it must have been a dream .
" I do not know which it ought to be called ."
" Being my friend ' s , I have no right to expose it in any degree to the public eye , but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it ."
They are but too apt to give up music ."
What you direct in this house cannot be wrong .
At the same time , nobody could wonder if Mr . Elton should have aspired -- Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on , so good - humouredly .
I am not like Jane ; I wish I were .
had it , by any blessed felicity , occurred to her , to institute the comparison .-- She saw that there never had been a time when she did not consider Mr . Knightley as infinitely the superior , or when his regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear .
No , she had had enough of interference .
So mild and ladylike -- and with such talents !-- I assure you I think she has very extraordinary talents .
This was the fact .
She is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom , with probably no settled provision at all , and certainly no respectable relations .
Emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
I would wish every thing to be as much to your taste as possible ."
( in a tone of wonder and pity ,) I had no idea that the law had been so great a slavery .
He was too angry to say another word ; her manner too decided to invite supplication ; and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they had to continue together a few minutes longer , for the fears of Mr . Woodhouse had confined them to a foot - pace .
I see no advantage in consulting Miss Bates ."
No such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present .
If you do not call early it will be a slight ."
June will soon be here ."
" I am not at all surprized at you , Harriet .
You are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars .
God knows , I have been a very indifferent lover .-- But you understand me .-- Yes , you see , you understand my feelings -- and will return them if you can .
" No -- I have never seen Mr . Elton ," she replied , starting on this appeal ; " is he -- is he a tall man ?"
She followed another carriage to Mr . Cole ' s door ; and was pleased to see that it was Mr . Knightley ' s ; for Mr . Knightley keeping no horses , having little spare money and a great deal of health , activity , and independence , was too apt , in Emma ' s opinion , to get about as he could , and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey .
A very few days brought the party from London , and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet , than she became perfectly satisfied -- unaccountable as it was !-- that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr . Knightley , and was now forming all her views of happiness .
He shook his head with a smile , and looked as if he had very little doubt and very little mercy .
very true indeed .
He loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
" Yes , sir , I did indeed ; and I am very much obliged by your kind solicitude about me ."
I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa , and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see .
But in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
It was now the middle of June , and the weather fine ; and Mrs . Elton was growing impatient to name the day , and settle with Mr . Weston as to pigeon - pies and cold lamb , when a lame carriage - horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty .
He had left them completely frightened ; and Harriet eagerly clinging to him , and hardly able to speak , had just strength enough to reach Hartfield , before her spirits were quite overcome .
The regular and best families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite -- neither Donwell , nor Hartfield , nor Randalls .
Her father ' s feelings were quite distinct .
Mrs . Weston looked , and looked in vain .
Mrs . Weston , with her baby on her knee , indulging in such reflections as these , was one of the happiest women in the world .
could not have supposed any thing !-- Such elegance and profusion !-- I have seen nothing like it since -- Well , where shall we sit ?
Yes , Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which , because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days .
It is the very last thing I would stand the brunt of just now .
" You are materially changed since we talked on this subject before ."
" There is no necessity for my calling this morning ," said the young man ; " another day would do as well ; but there was that degree of acquaintance at Weymouth which --"
Emma laughed and disclaimed .
South End is an unhealthy place .
That is , I know you must have seen her a hundred times -- but are you acquainted ?"
Now there would be pleasure in her returning -- Every thing would be a pleasure .
" Elegant , agreeable manners , I was prepared for ," said he ; " but I confess that , considering every thing , I had not expected more than a very tolerably well - looking woman of a certain age ; I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs .
She opened the parlour door , and saw two gentlemen sitting with her father -- Mr . Weston and his son .
The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints .
" Oh !
As he became rational , he ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in their authority .
He agreed to it , but with so quiet a " Yes ," as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it .
And if they are , I only beg you to send them home ."
Oh !
-- Even Mr . Weston shook his head , and looked solemn , and said , " Ah !
cried Emma , shaking her head .--" Ah !
It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball , which she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy .-- She was extremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the Eltons , and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike ; and his praise of Harriet , his concession in her favour , was peculiarly gratifying .
Dixon .-- Very well .
It reminded her of their first forlorn tete - a - tete , on the evening of Mrs . Weston ' s wedding - day ; but Mr . Knightley had walked in then , soon after tea , and dissipated every melancholy fancy .
He began to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuit of Emma .
Remember it ?
If it be not inconvenient to you , pray let us go in , that I may prove myself to belong to the place , to be a true citizen of Highbury .
But she probably had something of that in her thoughts , when alluding to the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before .
