I do not see it ."
To provide for her otherwise was out of Colonel Campbell ' s power ; for though his income , by pay and appointments , was handsome , his fortune was moderate and must be all his daughter ' s ; but , by giving her an education , he hoped to be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter .
I am almost afraid that every moment will bring him ."
CHAPTER XII
When the visit was returned , Emma made up her mind .
That ' s a consideration indeed .-- But John , as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham , of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows , I cannot conceive any difficulty .
As Harriet now lived , the Martins could not get at her , without seeking her , where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension to seek her ; for since her refusal of the brother , the sisters never had been at Mrs . Goddard ' s ; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech .
" At this moment , perhaps , Mr . Elton is shewing your picture to his mother and sisters , telling how much more beautiful is the original , and after being asked for it five or six times , allowing them to hear your name , your own dear name ."
What Mr . Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject , being the accumulation of the ostler ' s own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at Randalls , was , that a messenger had come over from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill -- which messenger , however , had been no more than was expected ; and that Mr . Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines , containing , upon the whole , a tolerable account of Mrs . Churchill , and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early ; but that Mr . Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly , without waiting at all , and his horse seeming to have got a cold , Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise , and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by , the boy going a good pace , and driving very steady .
She is still nearer .-- And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body .
She had a great idea that people who had extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds of any body else ; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double - dyed , and therefore only said in reply ,
" Ah !
Alas !
Every body who saw it was pleased , but Mr . Elton was in continual raptures , and defended it through every criticism .
It is a most uncommon complexion , with her dark eye - lashes and hair -- a most distinguishing complexion !
To you , he will talk of farming ; to me , of drawing or music ; and so on to every body , having that general information on all subjects which will enable him to follow the lead , or take the lead , just as propriety may require , and to speak extremely well on each ; that is my idea of him ."
My liveliness and your solidity would produce perfection .-- Not that I presume to insinuate , however , that _some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already .-- But hush !-- not a word , if you please ."
No -- pray let her have time to look about her ."
The wish of distinguishing her , as far as civility permitted , was very evident , though it could not often proceed beyond a look .
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far , if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him .
" I shall not scold you .
to be sure ," cried Emma , " it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
Letters are no matter of indifference ; they are generally a very positive curse ."
Her cheeks flushed at the name , and she felt afraid of something , though she knew not what .
Elton ?"
No , the young lady , to be sure .
He thought it very well done of Mr . Knightley to invite them -- very kind and sensible -- much cleverer than dining out .-- He was not fond of dining out ."
CHAPTER XI
Frank Churchill caught the name .
" You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs . and Miss Bates ," said Emma , " I have not heard one inquiry after them ."
Five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
She is loveliness itself .
" Well , papa , if this is not encouragement to marry , I do not know what is .
so silly -- so satisfied -- so smiling -- so prosing -- so undistinguishing and unfastidious -- and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me , I would marry to - morrow .
I rather believe you are giving me more credit for acuteness than I deserve .
He did not suppose they could be damp now , in the middle of the day .
Hartfield will only put her out of conceit with all the other places she belongs to .
I should like to see two more here ,-- your pretty little friend , Miss Smith , and my son -- and then I should say we were quite complete .
I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm .
I think , on the contrary , when people shut themselves up entirely from society , it is a very bad thing ; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree , without living in it either too much or too little .
The danger would have been of my wearying you .
It is a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ; and will be soon followed by matter - of - fact prose ."
No sooner was she out of sight , than Emma exclaimed ,
You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into .
The preparations must take their time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on , and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in uncertainty -- at the risk -- in her opinion , the great risk , of its being all in vain .
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
-- He met her at the parlour - door , and hardly asking her how she did , in the natural key of his voice , sunk it immediately , to say , unheard by her father ,
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs . Elton ' s thoughts , and understand why she was , like herself , in happy spirits ; it was being in Miss Fairfax ' s confidence , and fancying herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other people .
" Not at all ."
But while so many were devoting him to Emma , and Emma herself making him over to Harriet , Mr . Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax .
" Not at all .
The evening before this great event ( for it was a very great event that Mr . Woodhouse should dine out , on the 24th of December ) had been spent by Harriet at Hartfield , and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold , that , but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs . Goddard , Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house .
This discovery laid many smaller matters open .
" I have escaped ; and that I should escape , may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself .
" If you please , my dear .
Mr . Perry has been with her , as you probably heard ."
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal ,-- the ball at the Crown .
He will find an _addition_ to the society of Highbury when he comes again ; that is , if I may presume to call myself an addition .
Such kind friends , you know , Miss Woodhouse , one must always find agreeable , though every body seemed rather fagged after the morning ' s party .
Excepting yourself and your brother , I do not know his equal for temper .
" You are comfortable because you are under command ."
Only give me a carte - blanche .-- I am Lady Patroness , you know .
Her early attachment to herself was very amiable ; and her inclination for good company , and power of appreciating what was elegant and clever , shewed that there was no want of taste , though strength of understanding must not be expected .
Your description of Mrs . Churchill made me think of them directly .
" _He_ is undoubtedly very much in love -- every thing denotes it -- very much in love indeed !-- and when he comes again , if his affection continue , I must be on my guard not to encourage it .-- It would be most inexcusable to do otherwise , as my own mind is quite made up .
She was so surprized she did not know what to do .
Harriet , necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins , was less and less at Hartfield ; which was not to be regretted .-- The intimacy between her and Emma must sink ; their friendship must change into a calmer sort of goodwill ; and , fortunately , what ought to be , and must be , seemed already beginning , and in the most gradual , natural manner .
" They are to be put into Mr . Weston ' s stable , papa .
" Four o ' clock !-- depend upon it he will be here by three ," was Mr . Weston ' s quick amendment ; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting .
She was obliged to stop and think .
It was not the gipsies -- it was not Mr . Frank Churchill that I meant .
As to any thing superior for you , I suppose she is quite in the dark .
Upon the whole , she was equally contented with her view of his feelings .
Will not the old prejudice be too strong ?"
You quite shock me ; if you mean a fling at the slave - trade , I assure you Mr . Suckling was always rather a friend to the abolition ."
Was not she the whole day with you ?"
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech , the many bitter feelings , made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma ' s side , to enable her to say on reply ,
Mrs . Weston looked , and looked in vain .
" Mr .
She said no more , other subjects took their turn ; and the rest of the dinner passed away ; the dessert succeeded , the children came in , and were talked to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation ; a few clever things said , a few downright silly , but by much the larger proportion neither the one nor the other -- nothing worse than everyday remarks , dull repetitions , old news , and heavy jokes .
Young ladies should take care of themselves .-- Young ladies are delicate plants .
" In short ," said he , " perhaps , Miss Woodhouse -- I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion "--
He did not know what was come to his master lately , he said , but he could hardly ever get the speech of him .
I think you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that ."
How do you do , Miss Smith ?-- Very well I thank you .-- And I begged Mrs . Weston to come with me , that I might be sure of succeeding ."
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself .
Who cried most ?"
The naivete of Miss Smith ' s manners -- and altogether -- Oh , it is most admirable !
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else ; but you need not be afraid , they are very small , you see -- one of our small eggs will not hurt you .
Emma saw how Mr . Weston understood these joyous prospects .
She was in no hurry at all .
With an alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively , with the real good - will of a mind delighted with its own ideas , did she then do all the honours of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters , with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests .
No , it was long enough , broad enough , handsome enough .
Isabella does not seem more my sister ; has never excited a greater interest ; perhaps hardly so great .
A conundrum of Mr . Weston ' s shall clear him and his next neighbour .
" Proof indeed !"
He loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
` My dear ,' said I , ` I shall say you are laid down upon the bed :' but , however , she is not ; she is walking about the room .
I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away -- and when I have gone through my particular friends , then I begin dreaming of Mr . and Mrs .
Mr . Weston , do not mistake me .
