The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other .
Emma demurred .
Do not defer it .
He came to speak to his father on a subject ,-- to announce an attachment --"
replied Miss Bates .
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it .
Jane , don ' t you remember grandmama ' s telling us of it when we got home ?
She inherits her mother ' s talents , and must have been under subjection to her ."
" How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
Well , ( smiling ,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers , it has done all that is truly important .
I think very well of Mr . Elton , and this is the only way I have of doing him a service ."
To provide for her otherwise was out of Colonel Campbell ' s power ; for though his income , by pay and appointments , was handsome , his fortune was moderate and must be all his daughter ' s ; but , by giving her an education , he hoped to be supplying the means of respectable subsistence hereafter .
" Excuse me , ma ' am , but this is by no means my intention ; I make no inquiry myself , and should be sorry to have any made by my friends .
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch ; and though he did not say much , his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening .
The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend , was the name of Jane Fairfax .
" You will not find either , between Donwell and Highbury .
The older a person grows , Harriet , the more important it is that their manners should not be bad ; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness , or coarseness , or awkwardness becomes .
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
A very proper compliment !-- and then follows the application , which I think , my dear Harriet , you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending .
Were I to fall in love , indeed , it would be a different thing !
Miss Woodhouse , why are you always so right ?"
It was a most delightful reanimation of exhausted spirits .
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest , his thoughts full of what he had seen ; so full , that when the candles came to assist his observations , he must -- yes , he certainly must , as a friend -- an anxious friend -- give Emma some hint , ask her some question .
.
He only means --"
Miss Nash , head - teacher at Mrs . Goddard ' s , had written out at least three hundred ; and Harriet , who had taken the first hint of it from her , hoped , with Miss Woodhouse ' s help , to get a great many more .
" I have not been working uninterruptedly ," he replied , " I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily , it was not quite firm ; an unevenness in the floor , I believe .
That Emma was his object appeared indisputable .
They were so deserving , that a _little_ higher should have been enough : but as it was , how could she have done otherwise ?-- Impossible !-- She could not repent .
" Very soon , very soon , indeed ; that ' s the worst of it .
It can be round in five minutes ."
A man always imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her ."
I always say a woman cannot have too many resources -- and I feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to be quite independent of society ."
" I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love ."
" Upon my word ," she cried , " the young man is determined not to lose any thing for want of asking .
I am sure the service Mr . Frank Churchill had rendered you , in protecting you from the gipsies , was spoken of ."
" No , I do not know that Mr . Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly except --
" If it would be good to her , I am sure it would be evil to himself ; a very shameful and degrading connexion .
Well , time does fly indeed !-- and my memory is very bad .
" He has been wanting to come to us ," continued Mr . Weston , " ever since September : every letter has been full of it ; but he cannot command his own time .
" You are right .
" This is a pleasure ," said he , in rather a low voice , " coming at least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated .
no , the meeting is certainly to - day ," was the abrupt answer , which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs . Elton ' s side .-- " I do believe ," she continued , " this is the most troublesome parish that ever was .
Every thing turns out for his good .-- He meets with a young woman at a watering - place , gains her affection , cannot even weary her by negligent treatment -- and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him , they could not have found her superior .-- His aunt is in the way .-- His aunt dies .-- He has only to speak .-- His friends are eager to promote his happiness .-- He had used every body ill -- and they are all delighted to forgive him .-- He is a fortunate man indeed !"
Heavens !
He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoided : she was sure he would not -- and she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card - room .
But in time they will .
my mother ' s spectacles .
" And when she had come away , Mrs . Martin was so very kind as to send Mrs . Goddard a beautiful goose -- the finest goose Mrs . Goddard had ever seen .
I do not care for myself .
" I shall not give you any advice , Harriet .
" So very obliging of you !-- No rain at all .
In the meanwhile , she resolved against seeing Harriet .-- It would do neither of them good , it would do the subject no good , to be talking of it farther .-- She was resolved not to be convinced , as long as she could doubt , and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet ' s confidence .
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
I doubt it .
Voices approached the shop -- or rather one voice and two ladies : Mrs . Weston and Miss Bates met them at the door .
Mrs . Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note , or we should have been .-- But two such offers in one day !-- Never were such neighbours .
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal , and came back all the better -- grown quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to them , take an interest in their employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
He went to Highbury the next morning , and satisfied himself on that point .
Of the lady , individually , Emma thought very little .
Mr . Knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort !-- No longer walking in at all hours , as if ever willing to change his own home for their ' s !-- How was it to be endured ?
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness , she seemed determined to hazard nothing .
" Yes ," said Jane , " we heard his kind offers , we heard every thing ."
Half a minute brought it all out .
The evening was quiet and conversable , as Mr . Woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella , and the little party made two natural divisions ; on one side he and his daughter ; on the other the two Mr . Knightleys ; their subjects totally distinct , or very rarely mixing -- and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other .
" One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school , Harriet .
interrupted Emma , " there will be plenty of time for talking every thing over .
They are but too apt to give up music ."
She had heard , as soon as she got back to Mrs . Goddard ' s , that Mr . Martin had been there an hour before , and finding she was not at home , nor particularly expected , had left a little parcel for her from one of his sisters , and gone away ; and on opening this parcel , she had actually found , besides the two songs which she had lent Elizabeth to copy , a letter to herself ; and this letter was from him , from Mr . Martin , and contained a direct proposal of marriage .
He was here only a quarter of an hour , and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay -- but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said .
If he were , he would have done this differently .
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr . Weston depended , and felt , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes , was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity .
Elton ?"
And then whispering -- " Our companions are excessively stupid .
" I must have asked Miss Fairfax , and her languid dancing would not have agreed with me , after your ' s ."
I know what you mean -- but Emma ' s hand is the strongest ."
" They told me -- that Mr . Martin dined with them last Saturday ."
" Oh !
" A very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
Harriet unfolded the parcel , and she looked on with impatience .
That he should never have been able to indulge so amiable a feeling before , passed suspiciously through Emma ' s brain ; but still , if it were a falsehood , it was a pleasant one , and pleasantly handled .
When I look back to the first time I saw him !
dear , Kingston -- are you ?-- Mrs .
Isabella and Emma , I think , do write very much alike .
She could not bear to see him suffering , to know him fancying himself neglected ; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr . Knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated -- she could not proceed .
Mrs . Weston looked surprized , and said , " I did not know that he ever had any such plan ."
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
I think they judge wisely .
His mother and sisters were very fond of him .
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself , and without one real , rational difficulty to oppose or delay it .
Something really important seemed announced by his looks ; but , as her friend was well , she endeavoured not to be uneasy , and settling it with her father , that she would take her walk now , she and Mr . Weston were soon out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls .
She asked after their mutual friends ; they were all well .-- When had he left them ?-- Only that morning .
She knows I would not offend for the world .
The unpersuadable point , which he did not mention , Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father .
But it is done ; we are reconciled , dearer , much dearer , than ever , and no moment ' s uneasiness can ever occur between us again .
by the bye ," then sinking his voice , and looking demure for the moment --" I hope Mr . Knightley is well ?"
Skilful has been the hand !"
I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation .-- He is a very liberal thanker , with his thousands and tens of thousands .--` Happier than I deserve .'
" Pray say no more .
I do not say when , but perhaps you may guess where ;-- in the building in which N . takes M . for better , for worse ."
