Such language for a young man entirely dependent , to use !-- Nobody but you , Mr . Knightley , would imagine it possible .
" Yes -- I have some right to that knowledge ; though I have never been at the place in my life .-- She is an odd woman !-- But I never allow myself to speak ill of her , on Frank ' s account ; for I do believe her to be very fond of him .
I have already met with such success in two applications for pardon , that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of yours , and of those among your friends who have had any ground of offence .-- You must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my situation when I first arrived at Randalls ; you must consider me as having a secret which was to be kept at all hazards .
" I did not mean , I was not thinking of the slave - trade ," replied Jane ; " governess - trade , I assure you , was all that I had in view ; widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the victims , I do not know where it lies .
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour ' s relation , and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them , had passed undiscerned by her who now heard them ; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned , the two of strongest promise to Harriet , were not without some degree of witness from Emma herself .-- The first , was his walking with her apart from the others , in the lime - walk at Donwell , where they had been walking some time before Emma came , and he had taken pains ( as she was convinced ) to draw her from the rest to himself -- and at first , he had talked to her in a more particular way than he had ever done before , in a very particular way indeed !--( Harriet could not recall it without a blush .)
I do not know what she meant , but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay there again next summer ."
The children are all fond of him ."
" Me , my love ," cried his wife , hearing and understanding only in part .-- " Are you talking about me ?-- I am sure nobody ought to be , or can be , a greater advocate for matrimony than I am ; and if it had not been for the misery of her leaving Hartfield , I should never have thought of Miss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world ; and as to slighting Mr . Weston , that excellent Mr . Weston , I think there is nothing he does not deserve .
" No , my dear , I never encouraged any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
There is no admiration between them , I do assure you ; and the appearances which have caught you , have arisen from some peculiar circumstances -- feelings rather of a totally different nature -- it is impossible exactly to explain :-- there is a good deal of nonsense in it -- but the part which is capable of being communicated , which is sense , is , that they are as far from any attachment or admiration for one another , as any two beings in the world can be .
He had reached Randalls the evening before .
" He had never seen so lovely a face , and was delighted with her naivete ."
And at others , what a heap of absurdities it is !
poor Jane is ill !'
Will not the old prejudice be too strong ?"
One natural consequence of the evil she had involved herself in ," she said , " was that of making her _unreasonable_ .
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself ; Mr . Martin may be the richest of the two , but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society .-- The sphere in which she moves is much above his .-- It would be a degradation ."
Yes , Harriet , just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen what has happened .
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing ; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills .
" So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears !
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so ; but it was not immediately in her power .
Emma divined what every body present must be thinking .
And now , poor girl !
" No , indeed , I shall grant you nothing .
Her ignorance is hourly flattery .
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her general state , had carried her off after a short struggle .
He will think all the happiness , all the advantage , on your side of the question ; all the merit on mine .
I always fetch the letters when I am here .
" You owe me no apologies ; and every body to whom you might be supposed to owe them , is so perfectly satisfied , so delighted even --"
yes , gloves and every thing .
" Dear Mrs . Weston , how could you think of such a thing ?-- Mr .
The less worthy females were to come in the evening , with Miss Bates , Miss Fairfax , and Miss Smith ; but already , at dinner , they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ; and , while politics and Mr . Elton were talked over , Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour .
It is tenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally beloved -- which gives Isabella all her popularity .-- I have it not -- but I know how to prize and respect it .-- Harriet is my superior in all the charm and all the felicity it gives .
" But I thought you would .
In spite of her vexation , she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous , that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet , which Mrs . Weston had just gone through by herself .
Where the wound had been given , there must the cure be found if anywhere ; and Emma felt that , till she saw her in the way of cure , there could be no true peace for herself .
As to connexion , there Emma was perfectly easy ; persuaded , that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet , he had done nothing .
Perhaps to Hartfield , perhaps to the Abbey Mill , perhaps into his woods .-- Miss Woodhouse , this is not like our friend Knightley !-- Can you explain it ?"
I could not have believed it !
However , it was an exceeding good , pretty letter , and gave Mr . and Mrs . Weston a great deal of pleasure .
But I only mean to say that there are advertising offices , and that by applying to them I should have no doubt of very soon meeting with something that would do ."
" What does all that signify ?
Vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be doing something , good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs . Weston , indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general ; he became liable to all these charges .
" Ah !
Well , ( returning to the room ,) I have not been able to succeed .
Dear Harriet !-- I would not change you for the clearest - headed , longest - sighted , best - judging female breathing .
She talked with a great deal of reason , and at least equal affection -- but she had too much to urge for Emma ' s attention ; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square or to Donwell ; she forgot to attempt to listen ; and when Mrs . Weston ended with , " We have not yet had the letter we are so anxious for , you know , but I hope it will soon come ," she was obliged to pause before she answered , and at last obliged to answer at random , before she could at all recollect what letter it was which they were so anxious for .
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
no , indeed ; I must protest against any such idea .
I shall have no fears for you with him .
Now was the time for Mr . Frank Churchill to come among them ; and the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion .
Pray , dear Miss Woodhouse , tell me what I ought to do ."
Mrs . Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly .
When you are tired of eating strawberries in the garden , there shall be cold meat in the house ."
One perplexity , however , arose , which the gentlemen did not disdain .
" Emma knows I never flatter her ," said Mr . Knightley , " but I meant no reflection on any body .
My dear Isabella , I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr . Perry yet ; and he never forgets you ."
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
" And then their uncle comes in , and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way !"
It may be possible to do without dancing entirely .
To those who had no resources it was a different thing ; but my resources made me quite independent .
I went in for three minutes , and was detained by Miss Bates ' s being absent .
I shall just go round by Mrs . Cole ' s ; but I shall not stop three minutes : and , Jane , you had better go home directly -- I would not have you out in a shower !-- We think she is the better for Highbury already .
And as to its recommendations to _you_ , I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell on them .
James could take the note .
so far off !-- and the air so bad !"
He seemed by this connexion between the families , quite to belong to her .
So began Miss Bates ; and Mr . Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn , for most resolutely and commandingly did he say ,
united , what reverse we have !
" Yes , our good Mrs . Elton .
He was invited to contribute any really good enigmas , charades , or conundrums that he might recollect ; and she had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections ; and at the same time , as she could perceive , most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant , nothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass his lips .
If he means any thing , it must be to please you .
" To be sure !"
" I do not think it will ," stopping to look once more at all the outward wretchedness of the place , and recall the still greater within .
No , she had heard from him very lately , but having answered the letter , had put it away .
" Had you any idea ," cried Harriet , " of his being in love with her ?-- You , perhaps , might .-- You ( blushing as she spoke ) who can see into every body ' s heart ; but nobody else --"
There was instant pleasure in the sight of them , and still greater pleasure was conveyed in sound -- for Mr . Weston immediately accosted her with ,
Her character appeared absolutely changed .
Enscombe is in Yorkshire ?"
It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple now walked after her to church .
I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner , and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here ."
" It seems like madness !
Mr . Elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
She remembered what Mr . Knightley had once said to her about Mr . Elton , the caution he had given , the conviction he had professed that Mr . Elton would never marry indiscreetly ; and blushed to think how much truer a knowledge of his character had been there shewn than any she had reached herself .
They had received her doubtingly , if not coolly ; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time -- till just at last , when Mrs . Martin ' s saying , all of a sudden , that she thought Miss Smith was grown , had brought on a more interesting subject , and a warmer manner .
However , _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party , and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it ."
And yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good - will .
Mr . Weston , you must really have had Aladdin ' s lamp .
Where is your merit ?
She was feeling too much ; but at last Emma collected from her enough to understand the sort of meeting , and the sort of pain it was creating .
Invite them both ."
It was precisely what Emma would have wished , had she deemed it possible enough for wishing .
That was your name for him , was it ?"
A very few days had passed after this adventure , when Harriet came one morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand , and after sitting down and hesitating , thus began :
I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'
CHAPTER VIII
Martin !"
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
Her height was pretty , just such as almost every body would think tall , and nobody could think very tall ; her figure particularly graceful ; her size a most becoming medium , between fat and thin , though a slight appearance of ill - health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two .
" Yes -- rather -- I have been thinking of it some little time ."
