He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet .
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma , though I mean no slight to the state , I assure you ."
" Yes , she would be , but that she thinks there will be another put - off .
Vigorous , decided , with sentiments to a certain point , not coarse .
" I thought you meant to go with me .
Take your own ."
" Mrs . Churchill is not much in my good graces , as you may suspect -- but this is quite between ourselves .
Mr . Cole said how much taste you had ; and Mr . Frank Churchill talked a great deal about your taste , and that he valued taste much more than execution ."
You could not have gratified me more than by expressing an interest --.
If _we_ exert ourselves , I think we shall not be long in want of allies .
cried Emma , shaking her head .--" Ah !
I wish you may not catch cold ."
He paused -- and growing cooler in a moment , added , with only sarcastic dryness , " If Mr . Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty , I should be as willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself ."
Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeavour to forget it ."
There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her .
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point .
That was all very true .
I am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs . Cole told us of it at dinner ."
" My dear Emma ," said he at last , with earnest kindness , " do you think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the gentleman and lady we have been speaking of ?"
" Oh !
Neither would Mr . Knightley ' s downright , decided , commanding sort of manner , though it suits _him_ very well ; his figure , and look , and situation in life seem to allow it ; but if any young man were to set about copying him , he would not be sufferable .
said Emma , recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided between wonder and amusement .
He had wanted very much to go abroad -- had been very eager indeed to be allowed to travel -- but she would not hear of it .
Cole ."
" Perry !"
CHAPTER X
Selina says it is quite horror to her -- and I believe I have caught a little of her nicety .
" Oh !
A young _woman_ , if she fall into bad hands , may be teazed , and kept at a distance from those she wants to be with ; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_ ' s being under such restraint , as not to be able to spend a week with his father , if he likes it ."
She determined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers .
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea has been given me by circumstances ; and if Mr . Knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on Henry ' s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?"
Jane speaks so distinct !
Mr . Weston , who had been a widower so long , and who seemed so perfectly comfortable without a wife , so constantly occupied either in his business in town or among his friends here , always acceptable wherever he went , always cheerful -- Mr . Weston need not spend a single evening in the year alone if he did not like it .
Like him , she had tried the scheme and rejected it ; but such an alternative as this had not occurred to her .
Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith ' s being exactly the young friend she wanted -- exactly the something which her home required .
It was Miss Taylor ' s loss which first brought grief .
Later in the morning , and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o ' clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again .
Other poultry - yards in the neighbourhood also suffered .-- Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr . Woodhouse ' s fears .-- He was very uneasy ; and but for the sense of his son - in - law ' s protection , would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life .
The extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his .
She says I fidget her to death ; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same .
Mrs . Weston added , " that he could only allow himself time to hurry to Highbury , after breakfast , and take leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him ; and that he might be expected at Hartfield very soon ."
" Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning ?-- Do , if it be possible .
They will have their barouche - landau , of course , which holds four perfectly ; and therefore , without saying any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
It seemed at first an accidental division , but it never materially varied .
" Not at all ."
Poor Mr . Elton !
Do not run away with such an idea ."
Another view of man , my second brings , Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
She went on , however .
You will have no business here .-- Let it stay , however ,' said she ; ` give it houseroom till Colonel Campbell comes back .
I could not stay two minutes .
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is ; but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man -- I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .-- His feelings are warm , but I can imagine them rather changeable .-- Every consideration of the subject , in short , makes me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved .-- I shall do very well again after a little while -- and then , it will be a good thing over ; for they say every body is in love once in their lives , and I shall have been let off easily ."
In half a minute they were in the room .
Emma was most agreeably surprized .-- Mr .
Mr . Woodhouse ' s peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill - bestowed .
I assure you mine are very different .
The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet , which this one article marked , gave her severe pain .
It was her own choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury ; to spend , perhaps , her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear : and the Campbells , whatever might be their motive or motives , whether single , or double , or treble , gave the arrangement their ready sanction , and said , that they depended more on a few months spent in her native air , for the recovery of her health , than on any thing else .
" You may well be amazed ," returned Mrs . Weston , still averting her eyes , and talking on with eagerness , that Emma might have time to recover -- " You may well be amazed .
Mrs . Weston ought to have found more in it , for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him ; but though she had one sort of spirit , she had not the best .
And yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good - will .
" John does not even mention your friend ," said Mr . Knightley .
he told me all about it ; that Jane Fairfax and Mr . Frank Churchill are to be married , and that they have been privately engaged to one another this long while .
Weston ?-- To Bath , or to Clifton ?"
I only name possibilities .
How could you suppose me ignorant ?
He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else -- which is just as it should be , for a thriving man .
It must have been from attachment only , that she could be led to form the engagement .
" No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him ; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable .
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far , if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him .
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air ."
Jane speaks so distinct !
" Oh !
Quick and decided in her ways , Emma lost no time in inviting , encouraging , and telling her to come very often ; and as their acquaintance increased , so did their satisfaction in each other .
Do not be impatient , Emma ; it will all come out too soon ."
" She will be all delight and gratitude , but she will tell you nothing .
That was what happened before tea .
Highbury , that airy , cheerful , happy - looking Highbury , would be his constant attraction ."
Mr . Knightley , who , for some reason best known to himself , had certainly taken an early dislike to Frank Churchill , was only growing to dislike him more .
She restrained herself , however , from any of the reproofs she could have given , and only thanked Mrs . Elton coolly ; " but their going to Bath was quite out of the question ; and she was not perfectly convinced that the place might suit her better than her father ."
Be satisfied with doctoring and coddling yourself and the children , and let me look as I chuse ."
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable .
Another view of man , my second brings , Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
It soon flies over the present failure , and begins to hope again .
I could not have visited Mrs . Robert Martin , of Abbey - Mill Farm .
A private dance , without sitting down to supper , was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ; and Mrs . Weston must not speak of it again .
" I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case ," replied Emma ; " but am disposed to side with you , Mr . Weston .
" Oh , the difference of situation and habit !
She must tell you herself what she is -- yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .-- Since I began this letter , which will be longer than I foresaw , I have heard from her .-- She gives a good account of her own health ; but as she never complains , I dare not depend .
Look at her .
Till they all come in I shall not be missed ; and when they do , will you have the goodness to say that I am gone ?"
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter .
" Why , pretty well ; but not quite well .
Short had been the notice -- short their meeting ; he was gone ; and Emma felt so sorry to part , and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry , and feeling it too much .
" I mentioned no _names_ , you will observe .-- Oh !
There will be enough of them , in all probability , to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need .
