Mrs . Elton turned to Mrs . Weston .
But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded ."
It is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did , and refuse to take Jane ' s answer ; but she positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday , as Jane wished her ; she would wait -- and , sure enough , yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go .
" You are comfortable because you are under command ."
I have no thoughts of matrimony at present ."
" As you are going farther on business , sir , I will take the opportunity of paying a visit , which must be paid some day or other , and therefore may as well be paid now .
Where is your merit ?
thought Emma , " he would have done as much for Harriet ."
" Yes ," said Jane , " we heard his kind offers , we heard every thing ."
Emma only nodded , and smiled .-- After a little thinking , and a very tender sigh , he added ,
" I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax ," said Emma .
I think Harriet is doing extremely well .
You will have no business here .-- Let it stay , however ,' said she ; ` give it houseroom till Colonel Campbell comes back .
I met her frequently at Weymouth .
" Is not this most vexations , Knightley ?"
On another ,
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr . Weston ' s on the subject , as much as possible .
They combated the point some time longer in the same way ; Emma rather gaining ground over the mind of her friend ; for Mrs . Weston was the most used of the two to yield ; till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over , and the instrument in preparation ;-- and at the same moment Mr . Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it .
He quitted the militia and engaged in trade , having brothers already established in a good way in London , which afforded him a favourable opening .
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth .
If Miss Woodhouse would not be displeased , she would rather stay at home ."
Weston ."
" And I , Mr . Knightley , am equally stout in my confidence of its not doing them any harm .
no , upon my word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body .
Can I do any thing for you ?"
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your goodness , and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield ."
But I thought he would have staid now , and it would have been a pity not to have mentioned .
You and I need not be afraid .
Mr . Elton , who might marry any body !
Emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
.
I shall never forget his flying Henry ' s kite for him that very windy day last Easter -- and ever since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing that note , at twelve o ' clock at night , on purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham , I have been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence .-- If any body can deserve him , it must be Miss Taylor ."
There , it is done .
Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account .
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth .
It was her superior duty .
My dear sir , you are too obliging .
" Yes -- I _have_ called there ; passing the door , I thought it better .
you forget yourself -- you take me for my friend -- any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver ; but no more of this to _me_ , if you please ."
-- Emma had promised ; but still Harriet must be excepted .
" I wish ," said Mrs . Weston , " one could know which arrangement our guests in general would like best .
Soon after this Miss Bates came in , and Emma could not help being diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself , resulting , she supposed , from doubt of what might be said , and impatience to say every thing .
if you were to see what a headache she has .
His lady greeted him with some of her sparkling vivacity .
Knightley .-- Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ; for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet ' s ;-- and even were this not the case , he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly .
Oh no !
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
Emma would not have smiled for the world , and only said , " Is Mr . Elton gone on foot to Donwell ?-- He will have a hot walk ."
I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth , shan ' t I ?
Not unfrequently , through Emma ' s persuasion , he had some of the chosen and the best to dine with him : but evening parties were what he preferred ; and , unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company , there was scarcely an evening in the week in which Emma could not make up a card - table for him .
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr . Weston , and had half a mind to take it up ; but she struggled , and let it pass .
Frank was next to Emma , Jane opposite to them -- and Mr . Knightley so placed as to see them all ; and it was his object to see as much as he could , with as little apparent observation .
I cannot really change for the better .
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland , from his account of things ."
My heart was in Highbury , and my business was to get my body thither as often as might be , and with the least suspicion .
--
was Mrs . Weston ' s parting question .
" She would rather not be in his company more than she could help .
In spite of all her faults , she knew she was dear to him ; might she not say , very dear ?-- When the suggestions of hope , however , which must follow here , presented themselves , she could not presume to indulge them .
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company , Mr . Knightley , but I am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to Donwell Abbey ."
She was not so materially cast down , however , but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives .
The charming Augusta Hawkins , in addition to all the usual advantages of perfect beauty and merit , was in possession of an independent fortune , of so many thousands as would always be called ten ; a point of some dignity , as well as some convenience : the story told well ; he had not thrown himself away -- he had gained a woman of 10 , 000 l . or thereabouts ; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity -- the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice ; the history which he had to give Mrs . Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious -- the steps so quick , from the accidental rencontre , to the dinner at Mr . Green ' s , and the party at Mrs . Brown ' s -- smiles and blushes rising in importance -- with consciousness and agitation richly scattered -- the lady had been so easily impressed -- so sweetly disposed -- had in short , to use a most intelligible phrase , been so very ready to have him , that vanity and prudence were equally contented .
Had you witnessed my behaviour there , I can hardly suppose you would ever have thought well of me again .
Such , for half an hour , was the conversation -- interrupted only once by Mrs . Weston , who came out , in her solicitude after her son - in - law , to inquire if he were come -- and she was a little uneasy .-- She had some fears of his horse .
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
I should not have used the expression .
You knew I should not stir till my lord and master appeared .-- Here have I been sitting this hour , giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience -- for who can say , you know , how soon it may be wanted ?"
But poor Harriet could not follow .
We will go to Hartfield afterwards .
She felt immediately that she should like him ; and there was a well - bred ease of manner , and a readiness to talk , which convinced her that he came intending to be acquainted with her , and that acquainted they soon must be .
" Yes , upon my word , very considerable .
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
" To be sure we do ," cried his father ; " Mrs . Bates -- we passed her house -- I saw Miss Bates at the window .
You look as if you would not do such a thing again ."
I , who am owing all my happiness to _you_ , would not it be horrible ingratitude in me to be severe on them ?"
Knightley ."
" I have made a most wretched discovery ," said he , after a short pause .-- " I have been here a week to - morrow -- half my time .
Harriet was a little distressed -- did look a little foolish at first : but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly , and self - deceived , before , her pain and confusion seemed to die away with the words , and leave her without a care for the past , and with the fullest exultation in the present and future ; for , as to her friend ' s approbation , Emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature , by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations .-- Harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley ' s , and the dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight .
The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax ; and there she had no doubt .
Weston .-- " Very well , I thank you , ma ' am .
My greatest danger , perhaps , in housekeeping , may be quite the other way , in doing too much , and being too careless of expense .
The Coxes were wondering last night whether she would get into any great family .
Emma seriously hoped she would .
She has talked of it since .
" Ah !
I shall go abroad for a couple of years -- and when I return , I shall come to you for my wife .
Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr . Weston , and had half a mind to take it up ; but she struggled , and let it pass .
She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr . Elton , and now did full justice to ; and Harriet blushed and smiled , and said she had always thought Mr . Elton very agreeable .
" I hope not _that_ .-- It is not likely .
She must tell you herself what she is -- yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .-- Since I began this letter , which will be longer than I foresaw , I have heard from her .-- She gives a good account of her own health ; but as she never complains , I dare not depend .
There was no occasion to press the matter farther .
Every part of it brought pain and humiliation , of some sort or other ; but , compared with the evil to Harriet , all was light ; and she would gladly have submitted to feel yet more mistaken -- more in error -- more disgraced by mis - judgment , than she actually was , could the effects of her blunders have been confined to herself .
How nicely you talk ; I love to hear you .
What are you proud of ?
That is the key to a great deal of capacity .
Compressed into the very lowest vacant corner were these words --" I had not a spare moment on Tuesday , as you know , for Miss Woodhouse ' s beautiful little friend .
" There does , indeed , seem as little to tempt her to break her resolution at present ," said Mrs . Weston , " as can well be ; and while she is so happy at Hartfield , I cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which would be creating such difficulties on poor Mr . Woodhouse ' s account .
Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr . Elton , was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage .
He had made his fortune , bought his house , and obtained his wife ; and was beginning a new period of existence , with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through .
" The sooner every party breaks up , the better ."
