" Does nothing occur to you ?-- Do not you recollect ?-- Harriet Smith ."
There was a little blush , and then this answer ,
Have you heard the news ?
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him ; and that if he does chuse me , it will not be any thing so very wonderful ."
" Yes , yes -- but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my feelings .
It does not bear talking of ."
But is not this a sudden scheme ?"
-- But , in spite of these deficiencies , the wishes , the hopes , the confidence , the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the ceremony , were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union .
after the note I sent him this morning , and the message he returned , that he should certainly be at home till one ."
With this treatment , Mr . Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking as usual .
no , no ;-- every feeling revolts .
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is ; but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man -- I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .-- His feelings are warm , but I can imagine them rather changeable .-- Every consideration of the subject , in short , makes me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved .-- I shall do very well again after a little while -- and then , it will be a good thing over ; for they say every body is in love once in their lives , and I shall have been let off easily ."
But I do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do .
Emma was just describing the nature of her friend ' s complaint ;-- " a throat very much inflamed , with a great deal of heat about her , a quick , low pulse , & c . and she was sorry to find from Mrs . Goddard that Harriet was liable to very bad sore - throats , and had often alarmed her with them ."
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr . Frank Churchill , who is like nobody by his side .
That is too young to settle .
" How very pleasing and proper of him !"
This lesson , she very much feared , they would receive only from herself ; she had little hope of Mr . Knightley , none of Mr . Weston .
They were entering the hall .
" But you will come again ," said Emma .
No , Mr . Knightley , do not foretell vexation from that quarter ."
That young man ( speaking lower ) is very thoughtless .
And then , her reserve -- I never could attach myself to any one so completely reserved ."
To be constantly living with an ill - tempered person , must be dreadful .
After a few minutes of entire silence between them , John Knightley began with --
" Upon my word ," she cried , " the young man is determined not to lose any thing for want of asking .
The very last person whom one should expect to be forgotten !-- My dear Mr . E ., he must have left a message for you , I am sure he must .-- Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric ;-- and his servants forgot it .
" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr . Elton ' s marrying , Harriet , is the strongest reproach you can make _me_ .
How does Miss Smith do ?
And she is a good - natured woman after all .
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
" No ; not immediately here .
I have no reason to think ill of her -- not the least -- except that such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and manner , such a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body , is apt to suggest suspicions of there being something to conceal ."
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs . Elton ' s way before -- and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness ."
The black mare was blameless ; _they_ were right who had named Mrs . Churchill as the cause .
" It has a disagreeable look to me .
She would be very glad to stay ."
The preparations must take their time , nothing could be properly ready till the third week were entered on , and for a few days they must be planning , proceeding and hoping in uncertainty -- at the risk -- in her opinion , the great risk , of its being all in vain .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
" You may well class the delight , the honour , and the comfort of such a situation together ," said Jane , " they are pretty sure to be equal ; however , I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at present for me .
" It is too much a matter of fact , but here it is .-- What two letters of the alphabet are there , that express perfection ?"
" No , no ,"-- he gravely replied .--" Don ' t ask me .
You may be very sure that if I had , I should have cautioned you accordingly ."
That it was time for every body to go , concluded the subject ; and with a short final arrangement for the next day ' s scheme , they parted .
" Will Mr . Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford ?"
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush .
I shall talk about it to him ; he will settle for me ; he will help me out of all my difficulties .'
Accordingly , with a mixture of the serious and the playful , which she hoped would best suit his half and half state , she replied ,
" Better than she ever used to do ?-- You see how my father and Mrs . Weston doat upon her ."
A worthy employment for a young lady ' s mind !
" Ah , my dear ," said he , " poor Miss Taylor -- It is a grievous business ."
A word was put in for a second young Cox ; and at last , Mr . Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out , it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten , and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of .
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
Still , however , though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be leading them forward to the great event .
" My dear , you do not understand me .
Emma was rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things , and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment .
Mr . Woodhouse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him so , with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate , removed the chief of even Emma ' s vexation .
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
" I hope she does .
He wishes exceedingly to come ; but his uncle and aunt will not spare him ."
Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her -- James is so obliged to you !"
It was too old a story .-- Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet .-- They took a few turns together along the walk .-- The shade was most refreshing , and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day .
Knightley !-- I could not have believed it .
He owed it to her , to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference , rather than her welfare ; to encounter any thing , rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause .
I am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury , as they can be to see her .
I smile because you smile , and shall probably suspect whatever I find you suspect ; but at present I do not see what there is to question .
CHAPTER V
But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in -- observing , as she proposed it to Harriet , that , as well as she could calculate , they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax .
Emma was very decided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend .
I have no fears at all for myself ; and I should have no scruples of staying as late as Mrs . Weston , but on your account .
I am sure I had much rather hear you .
While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to myself , but now that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation in approving .
I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an opportunity as this of being married .
Mr . Woodhouse at last was off ; but Mr . Knightley , instead of being immediately off likewise , sat down again , seemingly inclined for more chat .
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto .
As to connexion , there Emma was perfectly easy ; persuaded , that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet , he had done nothing .
If she has it now , you have given it .
" Dirty , sir !
Indeed I must say that , much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected , he very far exceeds any thing .
" Whoever might be her parents ," said Mr . Knightley , " whoever may have had the charge of her , it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society .
It was a right thing to do .
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when Mrs . Perry drank tea with Mrs . and Miss Bates , or when Mrs . and Miss Bates returned the visit .
Mr . Weston is rather an easy , cheerful - tempered man , than a man of strong feelings ; he takes things as he finds them , and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other , depending , I suspect , much more upon what is called society for his comforts , that is , upon the power of eating and drinking , and playing whist with his neighbours five times a week , than upon family affection , or any thing that home affords ."
It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious , which she did not wish .
Oh !
."
Frank turned instantly to Emma , to claim her former promise ; and boasted himself an engaged man , which his father looked his most perfect approbation of -- and it then appeared that Mrs . Weston was wanting _him_ to dance with Mrs . Elton himself , and that their business was to help to persuade him into it , which was done pretty soon .-- Mr . Weston and Mrs . Elton led the way , Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed .
She had been decided in wishing for a Miss Weston .
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , Lords of the earth !
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
" Oh !
No !-- she was more and more convinced that Mrs . Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise .
Harriet ' s cheerful look and manner established hers : she came back , not to think of Mr . Martin , but to talk of Mr . Elton .
She wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like Frank Churchill better .-- He seemed often observing her .
I want you to call me something else , but I do not know what ."
Do not pity me till I saw her wan , sick looks .-- I reached Highbury at the time of day when , from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour , I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone .-- I was not disappointed ; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of my journey .
" I wish we could contrive it ," said she ; " but I cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in ;-- no servant that I want to inquire about of his housekeeper -- no message from my father ."
I shall be no support to Mrs . Weston .
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from almost all the rest .
Tell me , I charge you tell me this moment what it is ."
