" Ah !
All that remained to be wished was , that the nephew should form the attachment , as , with all her goodwill in the cause , Emma could feel no certainty of its being already formed .
Oh dear , no !
" Yes , papa ; we have something to read you , something quite fresh .
He came four times a day for a week .
She was sorry , very sorry .
But this good old Mr . Woodhouse , I wish you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner .
" Perhaps I intended you to say so , but I meant self - command .
It was an alarming change ; and Emma was thinking of it one morning , as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her , when Mr . Knightley came in , and distressing thoughts were put by .
" Nay , why do you ?"
" No , no , not at all -- only a little agitated .
For a moment or two nothing was said , and she was unsuspicious of having excited any particular interest , till she found her arm drawn within his , and pressed against his heart , and heard him thus saying , in a tone of great sensibility , speaking low ,
and I am sure our thanks are due to you , Mrs . Weston , on that score .
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr . Martin ' s prose .
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their side to make him slight his father .
" But , my dear papa , you are no friend to matrimony ; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_ ?
Selina has entirely given up music -- never touches the instrument -- though she played sweetly .
Mr . Knightley connected it with the dream ; but how it could all be , was beyond his comprehension .
We have never been there above once since the new approach was made ; but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely .
It would be almost beginning their life of civility again .
" I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs . Weston .
yes "-- he replied ; " I was just going to mention it .
" I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill .-- I can suppose , however , that I may have underrated him .
" My picture !-- But he has left my picture in Bond - street ."
But I gave what I believed the general opinion , when I called him plain ."
" Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment ."
They were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley ' s .
" I wish ," said Mrs . Weston , " one could know which arrangement our guests in general would like best .
Mr . Woodhouse saw the letter , and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life ."
" Who could have thought it ?
Nothing , but that the lessons of her past folly might teach her humility and circumspection in future .
She must know as well as her father , how acceptable an instrument would be ; and perhaps the mode of it , the mystery , the surprize , is more like a young woman ' s scheme than an elderly man ' s .
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself , and living under !-- The blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !-- she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she was wretched , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness .
Mr . Knightley does nothing mysteriously ."
I must make myself very disagreeable , or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend ."
He had been sitting with her , it appeared , most companionably at home , till her usual hour of exercise ; and on being desired to chuse their walk , immediately fixed on Highbury .--" He did not doubt there being very pleasant walks in every direction , but if left to him , he should always chuse the same .
It is just what I used to say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship , when , because things did not go quite right , did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited his feelings , he was apt to be in despair , and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen ' s saffron robe would be put on for us .
Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her inferior in talent , and all the elegancies of mind .
Understanding and gratification came together .
" I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr . Elton .
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ; but Harriet only wanted drawing out , and receiving a few , very few hints .
" You speak too plain .
Mine , I confess , are exhausted .
I merely called , because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs . Bates ; but I have been so pleasantly detained !
And he is a very clever boy , indeed .
They should take care of their health and their complexion .
" I do remember it ," cried Emma ; " I perfectly remember it .-- Talking about spruce - beer .-- Oh !
June will soon be here ."
Do not imagine me in danger of forgetting it ."
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
It was known that they were a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was .
He could not meet her in conversation , rational or playful .
Is it necessary for me to use any roundabout phrase ?-- Your Yorkshire friend -- your correspondent in Yorkshire ;-- that would be the way , I suppose , if I were very bad .-- No , I can pronounce his name without the smallest distress .
He had seen the coachmen , and they both agreed with him in there being nothing to apprehend .
Will you chuse a wife for me ?-- I am sure I should like any body fixed on by you .
My liveliness and your solidity would produce perfection .-- Not that I presume to insinuate , however , that _some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already .-- But hush !-- not a word , if you please ."
" I am very glad you did , and that you communicated it to me .
say beautiful rather .
" No , not at Randalls ; I have not been near Randalls ," when the door was thrown open , and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room .
" I am glad you approve of what I have done ," said he very comfortably .
" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
" Only think !
Let me entreat you , Miss Woodhouse , to exercise so charming a talent in favour of your friend .
yes , my dear , I dare say you might , because you know , the door was open , and the window was open , and Mr . Knightley spoke loud .
But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in January ."
" Thank you , dear Miss Woodhouse , you are all kindness .-- It is impossible to say -- Yes , indeed , I quite understand -- dearest Jane ' s prospects -- that is , I do not mean .-- But she is charmingly recovered .-- How is Mr .
The good lady had not given me the possibility of escape before ."
How do you do ?-- Very well , I thank you .
" I have reason to think ," he replied , " that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :-- Robert Martin is the man .
But you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directly opposite to your own .
Delighted to hear it indeed .
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
" Yes , to be sure , I suppose there are .
It soon appeared that London was not the place for her .
" Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you , knowing Weston to be out , and that you must still fight your own battle ."
Nothing could be pleasanter .
His dejection was most evident .
I should like to see two more here ,-- your pretty little friend , Miss Smith , and my son -- and then I should say we were quite complete .
" I know you , I know you ; you would take up with any thing ; but I shall be a little more nice , and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side ; with your superior talents , you have a right to move in the first circle .
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear .
That is _ship_ ;-- plain as it can be .-- Now for the cream .
So very odd we should happen to meet !
I will not open the window here ; it would give you all cold ; but I can go into my mother ' s room you know .
" Very serious !
The event , however , was most joyful ; and every day was giving her fresh reason for thinking so .-- Harriet ' s parentage became known .
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma , in a note from Mrs . Weston , instantly .
In short , she sat , during the first visit , looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency ; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and was determining that she would dislike her no longer .
I know what your drawings are .
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
But if you want to shew him any attention , my dear , ask him to come and dine with us some day .
" Ah !
Nothing should separate her from her father .
It would never do .
" Oh !
Going in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ;-- four horses and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle , shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had at home ."
such delicacy !-- and yet without being actually fair .-- One cannot call her fair .
I always say there is something direful in the sound : but nothing more is positively known of the Tupmans , though a good many things I assure you are suspected ; and yet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother , Mr . Suckling , who happens to be one of their nearest neighbours .
yes -- she will have her own room , of course ; the room she always has ;-- and there is the nursery for the children ,-- just as usual , you know .
I have been but half a friend to her ; and if she were _not_ to feel this disappointment so very much , I am sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;-- William Coxe -- Oh !
They are very , very kind in their visits .
