Your meaning must be unequivocal ; no doubts or demurs : and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires , will present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind , I am persuaded .
If the talking aunt had taken me quite by surprize , it must have been the death of me .
Her person was rather good ; her face not unpretty ; but neither feature , nor air , nor voice , nor manner , were elegant .
I am rather proud of little George .
Nothing can be more simple , you see .
He might even have Harriet in his thoughts at the moment ; who could say ?
Jane often says , when she is here , ` I am sure , grandmama , you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do -- and so much fine work as you have done too !-- I only wish my eyes may last me as well .'"
" I am glad you think so ; and the good hands , I hope , may not be wanting ."
The attentions of a certain person can hardly be among the tittle - tattle of Highbury yet .
" I am sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , excepting those little nervous head - aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free from anywhere , I am quite well myself ; and if the children were rather pale before they went to bed , it was only because they were a little more tired than usual , from their journey and the happiness of coming .
Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate , I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing .-- You never could persuade her to read half so much as you wished .-- You know you could not ."
you amuse me excessively .
Wingfield thinks the vicinity of Brunswick Square decidedly the most favourable as to air ."
" Oh !
I do not think it could disagree with you ."
Emma was extremely confused .
If he had never esteemed my opinion before , he would have thought highly of me then ; and , I dare say , left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had .
" How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
" Oh !
Warmth and tenderness of heart , with an affectionate , open manner , will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction , I am sure it will .
So then , I try to put it out of her thoughts , and say , Come ma ' am , do not let us think about it any more ."
For the world would not she have seemed to threaten me .-- Imagine the shock ; imagine how , till I had actually detected my own blunder , I raved at the blunders of the post .-- What was to be done ?-- One thing only .-- I must speak to my uncle .
One has not great hopes from Birmingham .
It is impossible ."
" Such a home , indeed !
after the note I sent him this morning , and the message he returned , that he should certainly be at home till one ."
Emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ; and after a moment ' s debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , replied ,
" She will be all delight and gratitude , but she will tell you nothing .
" Oh !
And , indeed , though my mother ' s eyes are not so good as they were , she can see amazingly well still , thank God !
" I know there is such an idea with many people , but indeed it is quite a mistake , sir .-- We all had our health perfectly well there , never found the least inconvenience from the mud ; and Mr . Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy ; and I am sure he may be depended on , for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air , and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly ."
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
But Mr . Weston is almost an old man .
I only want to know that Mr . Martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed ."
I thought -- but I beg your pardon , perhaps I have been under a mistake .
" Mrs . Elton , I suppose , has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes --"
CHAPTER IV
And , besides , I must give you a hint , Frank ; any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided .
My dear Emma , we must consider this .
Oh !-- you need not be afraid of owning it to me , for Mr . Weston has told me himself .
" A man cannot be more so ," was his short , full answer .
But here is my father coming : you will not object to my reading the charade to him .
Mr . Knightley loves to find fault with me , you know -- in a joke -- it is all a joke .
I have read worse charades .
" I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love ."
" A very serious sort , I assure you ;" still smiling .
No lurking horrors were to upbraid him for his easy credulity .
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr . Martin .
She is very fond of Frank , and therefore I would not speak ill of her .
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others , and buried from sight , she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across , for it was not mixed ; and Harriet , eager after every fresh word , and finding out none , directly took it up , and fell to work .
" He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed -- he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield , he must hurry off ."
" Such a fortnight as it has been !"
" That is a grand pianoforte , and he might think it too large for Mrs . Bates ' s house ."
I see no sign of attachment -- I believe nothing of the pianoforte -- and proof only shall convince me that Mr . Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax ."
But there was no doing any thing , with Mr . Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
She believed she had been foolish , but it had alarmed her , and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr . Perry .
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning .
Harriet ' s features are very delicate , which makes a likeness difficult ; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth which one ought to catch ."
If not wise or refined herself , she would have connected him with those who were ; but Miss Hawkins , it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit , had been the best of her own set .
It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious , which she did not wish .
The Churchills might not have a word to say in return ; but then , you would have no habits of early obedience and long observance to break through .
Charming people , Mr . and Mrs . Weston ;-- Mrs . Weston indeed is much beyond praise , and he is exactly what one values , so hospitable , and so fond of society ;-- it will be a small party , but where small parties are select , they are perhaps the most agreeable of any .
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
Fortunately for him , Highbury , including Randalls in the same parish , and Donwell Abbey in the parish adjoining , the seat of Mr . Knightley , comprehended many such .
" So scrupulous for others ," he continued , " and yet so careless for herself !
" But I ," he soon added , " who have had no such charm thrown over my senses , must still see , hear , and remember .
" On the misery of what she had suffered , during the concealment of so many months ," continued Mrs . Weston , " she was energetic .
I trust , at least , that you do not think Mr . Knightley looking ill ," turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband .
" I think her all you describe .
Of all the sources of evil surrounding the former , since her coming to Highbury , she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst .
My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well .
" You may depend upon me ," said she .
I must confess it is a recommendation to me .
Mr . Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer out of Harriet ' s head .
" I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother ," cried Emma , " about your friend Mr . Graham ' s intending to have a bailiff from Scotland , to look after his new estate .
He could not see her in a situation of such danger , without trying to preserve her .
" I hope she does .
A _Mrs . _ _Elton_ would be an excuse for any change of intercourse ; former intimacy might sink without remark .
And it is no small credit , in my opinion , to him , that he should excite such an affection ; for , though I would not say it to any body else , she has no more heart than a stone to people in general ; and the devil of a temper ."
Miss Fairfax ' s recent illness had offered a fair plea for Mrs . Weston to invite her to an airing ; she had drawn back and declined at first , but , on being pressed had yielded ; and , in the course of their drive , Mrs . Weston had , by gentle encouragement , overcome so much of her embarrassment , as to bring her to converse on the important subject .
shark is only one syllable .
Many vain solicitudes would be prevented -- many awkwardnesses smoothed by it .
Was it new for one , perhaps too busy to seek , to be the prize of a girl who would seek him ?-- Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal , inconsistent , incongruous -- or for chance and circumstance ( as second causes ) to direct the human fate ?
But do come in .
and have you actually found happiness in treasuring up these things ?"
Do you think it will look well ?"
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt , of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry ; the pleasure of looking at somebody new ; the gala - day to Highbury entire , which the sight of him would have made ; and ending with reflections on the Churchills again , found herself directly involved in a disagreement with Mr . Knightley ; and , to her great amusement , perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion , and making use of Mrs . Weston ' s arguments against herself .
Your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leave England ."
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
I know enough of music to speak decidedly on that point .
She and Mrs . Weston were obliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together .
" Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love .
She went to Mrs . Goddard ' s accordingly the very next day , to undergo the necessary penance of communication ; and a severe one it was .-- She had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding -- to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred -- and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis - judging in all her ideas on one subject , all her observations , all her convictions , all her prophecies for the last six weeks .
" Yes ; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays .
I see no sign of attachment -- I believe nothing of the pianoforte -- and proof only shall convince me that Mr . Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax ."
I never heard any county but Surry called so ."
They owed to him their two or three politest puzzles ; and the joy and exultation with which at last he recalled , and rather sentimentally recited , that well - known charade ,
replied Miss Bates .
She knows now what gentlemen are ; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance with Harriet ."
