In what respect ?
_She_ was a little occupied in weighing her own feelings , and trying to understand the degree of her agitation , which she rather thought was considerable .
Harriet listened submissively , and said " it was very true -- it was just as Miss Woodhouse described -- it was not worth while to think about them -- and she would not think about them any longer " but no change of subject could avail , and the next half - hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before .
I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith .
Upon my word , Jane on one arm , and me on the other !-- Stop , stop , let us stand a little back , Mrs . Elton is going ; dear Mrs . Elton , how elegant she looks !-- Beautiful lace !-- Now we all follow in her train .
You got Hannah that good place .
There will be enough of them , in all probability , to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need .
Elton ?"
It is impossible ."
Emma thought at least it would turn out so .
" He knew nothing about it , Emma .
Knightley .-- Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ; for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet ' s ;-- and even were this not the case , he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly .
Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what was due -- or rather what would be kind by me ."
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all -- not once the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows , letting in cold air upon heated bodies , which ( as you well know , sir ) does the mischief ."
Her views of improving her little friend ' s mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , had never yet led to more than a few first chapters , and the intention of going on to - morrow .
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax .
If I find him conversable , I shall be glad of his acquaintance ; but if he is only a chattering coxcomb , he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts ."
Emma laughed , and replied ,
but Jane Fairfax has them both , Harriet ."
My blindness to what was going on , led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed of , and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures , but I have no other reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier ."
It was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
Nobody had any information to give ; and , after a few more wonderings , Emma said ,
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr . Martin .
Do you really think it a bad thing ?-- why so ?"
I could not bear the idea of it ; so , as soon as Mr . Weston came into the room , and I could get at him , I spoke to him about the carriage .
" It is one thing ," said she , presently -- her cheeks in a glow --" to have very good sense in a common way , like every body else , and if there is any thing to say , to sit down and write a letter , and say just what you must , in a short way ; and another , to write verses and charades like this ."
.
" True , sir ; and Emma , because she had Miss Fairfax ."
She merely said , in the course of some trivial chat , " Well , Harriet , whenever you marry I would advise you to do so and so "-- and thought no more of it , till after a minute ' s silence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone , " I shall never marry ."
Could she be secure of that , indeed , of his never marrying at all , she believed she should be perfectly satisfied .-- Let him but continue the same Mr . Knightley to her and her father , the same Mr . Knightley to all the world ; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse of friendship and confidence , and her peace would be fully secured .-- Marriage , in fact , would not do for her .
She will not even listen to your questions .
Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can : at any rate do not let them carry you far , unless you are persuaded of his liking you .
" I am ready , if the others are ."
Under that peculiar sort of dry , blunt manner , I know you have the warmest heart .
" _You_ probably have been less surprized than any of us , for you have had your suspicions .-- I have not forgotten that you once tried to give me a caution .-- I wish I had attended to it -- but --( with a sinking voice and a heavy sigh ) I seem to have been doomed to blindness ."
So far from having long understood you , I have been in a most complete error with respect to your views , till this moment .
The present crisis , indeed , seemed to be brought on by them ; and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct ."
This was her history ; and particularly interesting it was to Mr . Woodhouse , who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry , and only regretted that she had not done it .
The event was more favourable to Mr . Woodhouse than to Emma .
By your account , he does seem to have had some scruples .
It is a mere nothing after all ; and not the least draught from the stairs ."
The distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet , and all that poor Harriet would be suffering , with the awkwardness of future meetings , the difficulties of continuing or discontinuing the acquaintance , of subduing feelings , concealing resentment , and avoiding eclat , were enough to occupy her in most unmirthful reflections some time longer , and she went to bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction of her having blundered most dreadfully .
As for _his_ going , Emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
Though much might be fancy , he could not doubt , when he looked back , that she was in a weaker state of health than she had been half a year ago .
" Indeed !-- from Yorkshire , I think .
" I have not a fault to find with her person ," he replied .
Mr . Elton ' s superiority had very ample acknowledgment .
One is sick of the very name of Jane Fairfax .
It is impossible to refuse what you ask in such a way .
Besides , she is out of health now ; but _that_ indeed , by her own account , she has always been .
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
I was snowed up at a friend ' s house once for a week .
regular features , open countenance , with a complexion !
no , the meeting is certainly to - day ," was the abrupt answer , which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs . Elton ' s side .-- " I do believe ," she continued , " this is the most troublesome parish that ever was .
I knew who it came from .
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr . Weston depended , and felt , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes , was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity .
I did not know what to do .
Till now that she was threatened with its loss , Emma had never known how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr . Knightley , first in interest and affection .-- Satisfied that it was so , and feeling it her due , she had enjoyed it without reflection ; and only in the dread of being supplanted , found how inexpressibly important it had been .-- Long , very long , she felt she had been first ; for , having no female connexions of his own , there had been only Isabella whose claims could be compared with hers , and she had always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed Isabella .
" Upon my honour ," said he very seriously , " it does not .
I really am ashamed of always leading the way ."
" Well -- as you please ; only don ' t have a great set out .
He was too angry to say another word ; her manner too decided to invite supplication ; and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they had to continue together a few minutes longer , for the fears of Mr . Woodhouse had confined them to a foot - pace .
" So obliging of you !
[ Emma by Jane Austen 1816 ]
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure , excited by such tender consideration , replied ,
Woodhouse ?-- I am so glad to hear such a good account .
They are to be new set .
It was now the middle of June , and the weather fine ; and Mrs . Elton was growing impatient to name the day , and settle with Mr . Weston as to pigeon - pies and cold lamb , when a lame carriage - horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty .
Knightley immediately got up , and in a manner decidedly graver than usual , said ,
She never stopt till she had gone through the whole ; and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong , yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed -- and he had suffered , and was very sorry -- and he was so grateful to Mrs . Weston , and so much in love with Miss Fairfax , and she was so happy herself , that there was no being severe ; and could he have entered the room , she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever .
Common sense would have directed her to tell Harriet , that she must not allow herself to think of him , and that there were five hundred chances to one against his ever caring for her .--" But , with common sense ," she added , " I am afraid I have had little to do ."
He should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet Mr . and Mrs . Elton , and any other of his neighbours .-- He could not see any objection at all to his , and Emma ' s , and Harriet ' s going there some very fine morning .
Her views of improving her little friend ' s mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , had never yet led to more than a few first chapters , and the intention of going on to - morrow .
She went on herself , to give that portion of time to an old servant who was married , and settled in Donwell .
Elton ?"
Ever since the service he rendered Jane at Weymouth , when they were out in that party on the water , and she , by the sudden whirling round of something or other among the sails , would have been dashed into the sea at once , and actually was all but gone , if he had not , with the greatest presence of mind , caught hold of her habit -- ( I can never think of it without trembling !)
You must have heard every thing to be sure .
" I do pity you .
They were all three walking about together for an hour or two -- first round the shrubberies of Hartfield , and afterwards in Highbury .
But now , she would rather it had not happened .
But do not imagine that I want to influence you ."
" I do not understand what you mean by ` success ,'" said Mr . Knightley .
Only give me a carte - blanche .-- I am Lady Patroness , you know .
" Harriet !"
It is his own idea .
But Harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and Emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
" But , my dear sir , the difference of the journey ;-- only consider how great it would have been .-- An hundred miles , perhaps , instead of forty ."
The heat even would be danger .-- You are fatigued already ."
He understood what would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else .
You must promise me not to sit up ."
It must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !--
Be observant of him .
Emma , who was not really at all frightened herself , tranquillised this excess of apprehension by assurances of Mrs . Goddard ' s experience and care ; but as there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she could not wish to reason away , which she would rather feed and assist than not , she added soon afterwards -- as if quite another subject ,
My dear sir , you are too obliging .-- Is there nobody you would not rather ?-- I am not helpless .
But what shall I say ?
This was Colonel Campbell , who had very highly regarded Fairfax , as an excellent officer and most deserving young man ; and farther , had been indebted to him for such attentions , during a severe camp - fever , as he believed had saved his life .
I beg your pardon , sir .
" I think they will neither of them do the other any good ."
This is great news , indeed .
There would have been either the ostentation of a coxcomb , or the evasions of a mind too weak to defend its own vanities .-- No , I am perfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly ."
