" Ah !
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
The loss of the ball -- the loss of the young man -- and all that the young man might be feeling !-- It was too wretched !-- Such a delightful evening as it would have been !-- Every body so happy !
" I have always admired her complexion ," replied Emma , archly ; " but do not I remember the time when you found fault with her for being so pale ?-- When we first began to talk of her .-- Have you quite forgotten ?"
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion , by giving her very proper attention , after the introduction had passed .
She will be extremely sorry to miss seeing you , Miss Woodhouse , but your kindness will excuse her .
Miss Fairfax knows it is not from the Campbells , or they would have been guessed at first .
" I have not the least wish for it , I thank you ."
He is but young , and his uncle , perhaps --"
It was an alarming change ; and Emma was thinking of it one morning , as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her , when Mr . Knightley came in , and distressing thoughts were put by .
So she thought at first ;-- but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need not be put off .
What ever she might feel of brighter hope , she betrayed nothing .
" Was he agreeable ?"
But I am a partial old friend ."
" Miss Fairfax ' s compliments and thanks , but is quite unequal to any exercise ."
Did not I tell you what he said of you the other day ?"
" None ; not one .
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting .
That would be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance !
" Our little friend Harriet Smith , however , is just such another pretty kind of young person .
" It will not do ," whispered Frank to Emma ; " they are most of them affronted .
It was the very event to engage those who talk most , the young and the low ; and all the youth and servants in the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news .
" Handsome !
" Take a little time , consider , do not commit yourself ."
" Dating from three o ' clock yesterday .
Mrs . Weston had been delighted before , and was delighted again ; Emma joined her in all her praise ; and the pianoforte , with every proper discrimination , was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise .
Now , as we may fairly suppose , he would not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady , and as he does not appear to have spoken yesterday , it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs . Goddard ' s to - day ; and she may be detained by a visitor , without thinking him at all a tiresome wretch ."
But Jane , it seems , had a letter from them very lately , and not a word was said about it .
CHAPTER XII
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping .
It is not likely that I _should_ , considering what I have been used to .
" I have not even made any inquiry ; I do not wish to make any yet ."
But Emma , in her own mind , determined that he _did_ know what he was talking about , and that he shewed a very amiable inclination to settle early in life , and to marry , from worthy motives .
Then , here come all my attempts at three of those four children ;-- there they are , Henry and John and Bella , from one end of the sheet to the other , and any one of them might do for any one of the rest .
" My dear , you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain , and that you yourself --"
If you think he will come , I shall think so too ; for you know Enscombe ."
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear her in any thing else .
Pray come in ; do come in .
I will keep my ill - humour to myself .
She was so surprized she did not know what to do .
Frank Churchill sang again .
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten days ' end , her nephew ' s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan .
Call upon her , by all means ."
" So obliged to you !-- so very much obliged to you for the carriage ," resumed Miss Bates .
All this ran so glibly through her thoughts , that by the time her father had arranged himself , after the bustle of the Eltons ' departure , and was ready to speak , she was very tolerably capable of attending .
They were going to take the two eldest boys to Astley ' s .
cried Emma , after a moment ' s pause --" What do you mean ?-- Good Heaven !
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
She absolutely refused to allow me , which I then thought most unreasonable .
There was only Harriet , who seemed not in spirits herself , fagged , and very willing to be silent ; and Emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home , without being at any trouble to check them , extraordinary as they were .
" Oh !
One cannot wonder , one cannot wonder .
This card - room would be wanted as a card - room now ; or , if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves , still was it not too small for any comfortable supper ?
She was all pleasure and gratitude , both for Harriet and herself , and longed to be thanking him ; and though too distant for speech , her countenance said much , as soon as she could catch his eye again .
After this , he made some progress without any pause .
" My dear Jane , say no more about it .
If I had followed her judgment , and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper , I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known .-- We quarrelled .-- Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell ?-- _There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis .
But you , who have known Miss Fairfax from a child , must be a better judge of her character , and of how she is likely to conduct herself in critical situations , than I can be ."
The less worthy females were to come in the evening , with Miss Bates , Miss Fairfax , and Miss Smith ; but already , at dinner , they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ; and , while politics and Mr . Elton were talked over , Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour .
I knew he would !"
.
" I lay it down as a general rule , Harriet , that if a woman _doubts_ as to whether she should accept a man or not , she certainly ought to refuse him .
I hope you do not retract what you then said ."
" I have reason to think ," he replied , " that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :-- Robert Martin is the man .
In the meanwhile , she resolved against seeing Harriet .-- It would do neither of them good , it would do the subject no good , to be talking of it farther .-- She was resolved not to be convinced , as long as she could doubt , and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet ' s confidence .
She heard enough to know that Mr . Weston was giving some information about his son ; she heard the words " my son ," and " Frank ," and " my son ," repeated several times over ; and , from a few other half - syllables very much suspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son ; but before she could quiet Mr . Elton , the subject was so completely past that any reviving question from her would have been awkward .
This was Mr . Elton !
you forget yourself -- you take me for my friend -- any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver ; but no more of this to _me_ , if you please ."
I wish Jane Fairfax very well ; but she tires me to death ."
But I want to set your heart at ease as to Mrs . S .-- _My_ representation , you see , has quite appeased her ."
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
The error has been all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give , I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell .'"
_What_ she was , must be uncertain ; but _who_ she was , might be found out ; and setting aside the 10 , 000 l ., it did not appear that she was at all Harriet ' s superior .
" Poor creatures !
It is a dreadful thing to have you forced to live there !
shark is only one syllable .
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer .
It is the very last thing I would stand the brunt of just now .
Randalls is such a distance .
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear .
he is off .
Nobody can be more devoted to home than I am .
He was dining with the Randalls family , and Jane , at the Eltons '; and he had seen a look , more than a single look , at Miss Fairfax , which , from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse , seemed somewhat out of place .
It will be felt so great an attention !
How it would affect Frank was among the earliest thoughts of both .
There she sat -- and who would have guessed how many tears she had been lately shedding ?
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come ?
Do not be impatient , Emma ; it will all come out too soon ."
I have often known it done myself ."
You have scolded me too much for match - making , for me to presume to take such a liberty with you .
How well you put it on !-- so gratified !
Not more than five couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful , and she found herself well matched in a partner .
" If he could stay only a couple of days , he ought to come ; and one can hardly conceive a young man ' s not having it in his power to do as much as that .
Could I mention any thing more fit to be done , than to go to Mrs . Goddard ?
Mrs . Perry had told somebody , and was extremely happy about it .
The most unaccountable business !
It was adventuring too far , assuming too much , making light of what ought to be serious , a trick of what ought to be simple .
" Poor child !"
go to - day , go to - day .
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory ; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness , which at that moment would have been dreadful penance , by the sound of her father ' s footsteps .
