They were permitted to go alone ; and with a cordial nod from one , and a graceful bow from the other , the two gentlemen took leave .
All looked up to them .
The truth of this representation there was no denying .
.
" In short ," said he , " perhaps , Miss Woodhouse -- I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion "--
She was a great talker upon little matters , which exactly suited Mr . Woodhouse , full of trivial communications and harmless gossip .
Miss Woodhouse , why are you always so right ?"
I should be surprized if , after seeing them , you could be in company with Mr . Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before .
William Larkins is such an old acquaintance !
My friend Robert could not resist .
This was so very well understood between them , that Emma could not but feel some surprise , and a little displeasure , on hearing from Mr . Weston that he had been proposing to Mrs . Elton , as her brother and sister had failed her , that the two parties should unite , and go together ; and that as Mrs . Elton had very readily acceded to it , so it was to be , if she had no objection .
but her lips were closed .
I wish I were anywhere else ."
Let me recommend Bath to you .
Should she proceed no farther ?-- should she let it pass , and seem to suspect nothing ?-- Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did ; or perhaps if she were totally silent , it might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear too much ; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been , such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances , she was perfectly resolved .-- She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once , all that she meant to say and know .
He had all the clearness and quickness of mind which she wanted , and he could sometimes act an ungracious , or say a severe thing .
" Now , ma ' am ," said Jane to her aunt , " shall we join Mrs .
" I do not believe any such thing ," replied Emma .--" I am persuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbours , when it is necessary ; but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent .
Oh !
The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary .
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs . Elton , and when Mrs . Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it !
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
CHAPTER XII
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr . Knightley .
I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what every man delights in -- what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies his judgment .
" I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years ' experience , and by not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child .
They seemed to be within half a sentence of Harriet , and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject , if possible .
I shall do something to expose myself ."
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
cried Harriet , colouring , and astonished .
My acquaintance with him has been but trifling .-- And even if I have not underrated him hitherto , he may yet turn out well .-- With such a woman he has a chance .-- I have no motive for wishing him ill -- and for her sake , whose happiness will be involved in his good character and conduct , I shall certainly wish him well ."
" Oh !
" You will not ask me what is the point of envy .-- You are determined , I see , to have no curiosity .-- You are wise -- but _I_ cannot be wise .
You will stay , and go with us ?"
What Mr . Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject , being the accumulation of the ostler ' s own knowledge , and the knowledge of the servants at Randalls , was , that a messenger had come over from Richmond soon after the return of the party from Box Hill -- which messenger , however , had been no more than was expected ; and that Mr . Churchill had sent his nephew a few lines , containing , upon the whole , a tolerable account of Mrs . Churchill , and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early ; but that Mr . Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly , without waiting at all , and his horse seeming to have got a cold , Tom had been sent off immediately for the Crown chaise , and the ostler had stood out and seen it pass by , the boy going a good pace , and driving very steady .
" I am very sorry to hear , Miss Fairfax , of your being out this morning in the rain .
" This is most kind , indeed !-- Miss Woodhouse , it is impossible for me to express -- I hope you will believe -- Excuse me for being so entirely without words ."
And , by the bye , can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion ?-- Pray be sincere , Knightley .
Fortunately for him , Highbury , including Randalls in the same parish , and Donwell Abbey in the parish adjoining , the seat of Mr . Knightley , comprehended many such .
A lady always does .-- She said enough to shew there need not be despair -- and to invite him to say more himself .
" I have not been working uninterruptedly ," he replied , " I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily , it was not quite firm ; an unevenness in the floor , I believe .
Now , however , we must wish you and Mrs . Bates good morning ."
What strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , was another point ; but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; and this persuasion , joined to all the rest , made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him , in spite of every previous determination against it .
No husbands and wives ," with so interesting a consciousness , that Emma began to consider whether she had not better leave them together at once .
Emma understood him ; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter of pleasure , excited by such tender consideration , replied ,
" Nay , she has always been a first favourite with him , as you very well know ."
" As you are going farther on business , sir , I will take the opportunity of paying a visit , which must be paid some day or other , and therefore may as well be paid now .
" I am sure you were of use to me ," cried Emma .
I will call another day , and hear the pianoforte ."
It was on the wedding - day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet , which Emma could understand .
It was being very deficient ."
He loved to have the cloth laid , because it had been the fashion of his youth , but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing , his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat .
Mr . Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way .
" Why do you smile ?"
" I must not hope to be ever situated as you are , in the midst of every dearest connexion , and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing older should make me indifferent about letters ."
" But , my dear papa , you are no friend to matrimony ; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_ ?
said Emma playfully .
I think you understand me , therefore ."
" Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her , or that she admired him ?"
The heat even would be danger .-- You are fatigued already ."
I felt that , as to fortune , in all probability he might do much better ; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate , he could not do worse .
" Well , he is coming , you see ; good news , I think .
Oh , no !
He has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart ."
And , by the bye , can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion ?-- Pray be sincere , Knightley .
She wanted to be of use to her ; wanted to shew a value for her society , and testify respect and consideration .
I have never been attached to him .
` Oh !
It crossed my mind immediately that you would not regret your friend ' s leaving Highbury , for the sake of her being settled so well .
and she had difficulty in behaving with temper .
It is a great change ; and though she is amazingly fortunate -- such a situation , I suppose , as no young woman before ever met with on first going out -- do not think us ungrateful , Miss Woodhouse , for such surprising good fortune --( again dispersing her tears )-- but , poor dear soul !
I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs . Elton , by calling you Mr . K .-- But I will promise ," she added presently , laughing and blushing --" I will promise to call you once by your Christian name .
and to see you in such excellent looks !-- I would not have missed this meeting for the world .
I would rather not be tempted .
This is precisely what I wanted .
Elton had just joined them , and his wife was exclaiming ,
" Oh !
" My dear Miss Fairfax , young ladies are very sure to be cared for .-- I hope your good grand - mama and aunt are well .
She liked his open manners , but a little less of open - heartedness would have made him a higher character .-- General benevolence , but not general friendship , made a man what he ought to be .-- She could fancy such a man .
This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by , and Mr . Weston , with a very good grace , immediately exclaimed ,
" Not I , indeed .
When she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be very much in love ; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings .
I shall not attempt calling on Mrs . Goddard , for I really do not think she cares for any thing but _boiled_ pork : when we dress the leg it will be another thing .
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room .
The touch seemed immediate .
He could not be persuaded that so many good - looking houses as he saw around him , could not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting ; and even when particulars were given and families described , he was still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing , or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body ' s returning into their proper place the next morning .
Not a creature knowing it but themselves -- neither the Campbells , nor her family , nor his .-- It is so wonderful , that though perfectly convinced of the fact , it is yet almost incredible to myself .
It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment ."
You must think one five hundred million times more above me than the other .
that ' s all .
She was proved to have been universally mistaken ; and she had not quite done nothing -- for she had done mischief .
Good old Mrs . Bates -- I will call upon her to - morrow , and take my children .-- They are always so pleased to see my children .-- And that excellent Miss Bates !-- such thorough worthy people !-- How are they , sir ?"
" She will not be surprized , papa , at least ."
That was the kind action ; that was the noble benevolence and generosity ; that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth ."
A very proper compliment !-- and then follows the application , which I think , my dear Harriet , you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending .
-- and " Dear Miss Woodhouse ," was all that Harriet , with many tender embraces could articulate at first ; but when they did arrive at something more like conversation , it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw , felt , anticipated , and remembered just as she ought .
He is but young , and his uncle , perhaps --"
Look at my shoes .
If he means any thing , it must be to please you .
