They called for him in their way ; were all extremely amused ; and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day -- which he did -- and in the course of that visit ( as I understand ) he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet ; and certainly did not speak in vain .-- She made him , by her acceptance , as happy even as he is deserving .
" Oh !
" I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour .
" My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring , or summer at farthest ," continued Mrs . Elton ; " and that will be our time for exploring .
convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield .
They were now approaching the cottage , and all idle topics were superseded .
For the present , he could not be spared , to his " very great mortification and regret ; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at no distant period ."
It was natural for him to feel that he had _cause_ to sigh .
If it were love , it might be simple , single , successless love on her side alone .
Elton may talk sentimentally , but he will act rationally .
and once Henry asked me for a knife , but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas .
Impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort ; if we except , perhaps , Mrs . Suckling ' s own family , and Mrs . Bragge ' s ; but Mrs . Smallridge is intimate with both , and in the very same neighbourhood :-- lives only four miles from Maple Grove .
" Emma , I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do : a privilege rather endured than allowed , perhaps , but I must still use it .
Harriet listened submissively , and said " it was very true -- it was just as Miss Woodhouse described -- it was not worth while to think about them -- and she would not think about them any longer " but no change of subject could avail , and the next half - hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before .
Mr . Woodhouse was quite at ease ; and the seeing him so , with the arrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother on hearing his fate , removed the chief of even Emma ' s vexation .
Emma saw how Mr . Weston understood these joyous prospects .
That ' s one of the ladies in the Irish car party , not at all like her .-- Well , I declare --"
From Monday next to Saturday , I assure you we have not a disengaged day !-- A woman with fewer resources than I have , need not have been at a loss ."
" But you , who are so extremely fond of it -- there can be no danger , surely ?"
Only think of those sweet verses --` To Miss --------.'
Mr . Perry is not gone ."
Mr . Elton and I are very good friends , and nothing more ;" and she walked on , amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances , of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into ; and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant , and in want of counsel .
Her attention was now claimed by Mr . Woodhouse , who being , according to his custom on such occasions , making the circle of his guests , and paying his particular compliments to the ladies , was ending with her -- and with all his mildest urbanity , said ,
The contrivances of modern days indeed have rendered a gentleman ' s carriage perfectly complete .
She had been thinking of him the moment before , as unquestionably sixteen miles distant .-- There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind .
" And I am sure I should never want to go there ; for I am never happy but at Hartfield ."
" He told me at parting , that he should soon write ; and he spoke in a manner which seemed to promise me many particulars that could not be given now .
It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent , or so indignant ; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the ball , for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree .
He did so , but very soon stopt again to say , " the pianoforte !
I can see nothing at all extraordinary in him now .-- I do not care whether I meet him or not -- except that of the two I had rather not see him -- and indeed I would go any distance round to avoid him -- but I do not envy his wife in the least ; I neither admire her nor envy her , as I have done : she is very charming , I dare say , and all that , but I think her very ill - tempered and disagreeable -- I shall never forget her look the other night !-- However , I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , I wish her no evil .-- No , let them be ever so happy together , it will not give me another moment ' s pang : and to convince you that I have been speaking truth , I am now going to destroy -- what I ought to have destroyed long ago -- what I ought never to have kept -- I know that very well ( blushing as she spoke ).-- However , now I will destroy it all -- and it is my particular wish to do it in your presence , that you may see how rational I am grown .
" Indeed !-- that must be a very great pleasure ."
You will stay , and go with us ?"
We were just in time ; my mother just ready for us .
I have been walking all this way in complete suspense .
" What sort of looking man is Mr .
You are too bountiful !
I may not have convinced you perhaps , but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr . Dixon is a principal in the business ."
Oh dear , no !
June will soon be here ."
I never can be blameless .
Now I say , my dear , in _our_ case , for _lady_ , read ---- mum !
The weather was most favourable for her ; though Christmas Day , she could not go to church .
If this is living in the country , it is nothing very formidable .
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
They lived beyond their income , but still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe : she did not cease to love her husband , but she wanted at once to be the wife of Captain Weston , and Miss Churchill of Enscombe .
She then began to speak of you , and of the great kindness you had shewn her during her illness ; and with a blush which shewed me how it was all connected , desired me , whenever I had an opportunity , to thank you -- I could not thank you too much -- for every wish and every endeavour to do her good .
Interference -- fruitless interference .
The wedding was no distant event , as the parties had only themselves to please , and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for ; and when he set out for Bath again , there was a general expectation , which a certain glance of Mrs . Cole ' s did not seem to contradict , that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride .
" Oh !
Miss Bates ' s powerful , argumentative mind might have strengthened yours ."
Emma and Harriet went together ; Miss Bates and her niece , with the Eltons ; the gentlemen on horseback .
It is not a connexion to gratify ; but if Mr . Churchill does not feel that , why should we ?
We must consider what Miss Fairfax quits , before we condemn her taste for what she goes to ."
" It comes to the same thing .
" Well ," said Mrs . Weston , smiling , " you give him credit for more simple , disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do ; for while Miss Bates was speaking , a suspicion darted into my head , and I have never been able to get it out again .
where shall we sit ?
Mr . Frank Churchill , I must tell you my mother ' s spectacles have never been in fault since ; the rivet never came out again .
It was not thrown away on her , she bounded higher than ever , flew farther down the middle , and was in a continual course of smiles .
By his style , I should imagine it just settled ."
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
" Good Heaven !"
Elton had just joined them , and his wife was exclaiming ,
" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
So Emma thought , at least .
Of very important , very recordable events , it was not more productive than such meetings usually are .
Mr . Elton returned , a very happy man .
He may spend the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes ."
_I_ think seriously of Miss Smith !-- Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl ; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled .
Dinner was on table .-- Mrs .
" Very ."
Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked into Mrs . Weston ' s drawing - room ;-- Mr . Elton must compose his joyous looks , and Mr . John Knightley disperse his ill - humour .
She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet ; but every blessing of her own seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend , who must now be even excluded from Hartfield .
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that , when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister , she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella ' s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane Fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
Nature gave you understanding :-- Miss Taylor gave you principles .
You shall have a charming wife ."
" No , I thank you .
Miss Nash had told her all this , and had talked a great deal more about Mr . Elton ; and said , looking so very significantly at her , " that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be , but she only knew that any woman whom Mr . Elton could prefer , she should think the luckiest woman in the world ; for , beyond a doubt , Mr . Elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness ."
The contrast between Mrs . Churchill ' s importance in the world , and Jane Fairfax ' s , struck her ; one was every thing , the other nothing -- and she sat musing on the difference of woman ' s destiny , and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed , till roused by Miss Bates ' s saying ,
There will be enough for every hope and every fear ; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent , it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder .
Had it been allowable entertainment , had there been no pain to her friend , or reproach to herself , in the waverings of Harriet ' s mind , Emma would have been amused by its variations .
Most cordially , when Miss Bates arrived , did she agree that it must .
Miss Fairfax , I dare say , would not have me if I were to ask her -- and I am very sure I shall never ask her ."
Bless me !
It was all my doing , I know .
" Of all horrid things , leave - taking is the worst ."
I perfectly understand your situation , however , Miss Woodhouse -- ( looking towards Mr . Woodhouse ), Your father ' s state of health must be a great drawback .
She hoped no one could have said to her , " How could you be so unfeeling to your father ?-- I must , I will tell you truths while I can ."
No ; he was talking to Mrs . Cole -- he was looking on unconcerned ; Jane was asked by somebody else , and he was still talking to Mrs . Cole .
And poor John ' s son came to talk to Mr . Elton about relief from the parish ; he is very well to do himself , you know , being head man at the Crown , ostler , and every thing of that sort , but still he cannot keep his father without some help ; and so , when Mr . Elton came back , he told us what John ostler had been telling him , and then it came out about the chaise having been sent to Randalls to take Mr . Frank Churchill to Richmond .
" There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all --" he began rather quickly , but checking himself , added , " however , it is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were -- how it might all be behind the scenes .
but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand .
I know the danger of indulging such speculations .
Nothing wanting .
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
That ' s right .
.
" I was going to observe , sir ," said Frank Churchill , " that one of the great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of any body ' s catching cold -- so much less danger at the Crown than at Randalls !
Do you suppose she does not often say all this to herself ?
Absolutely insufferable !
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me , and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will dictate towards her .-- If you think me in a way to be happier than I deserve , I am quite of your opinion .-- Miss W . calls me the child of good fortune .
