It can be allowable only as the thought of the moment ."
" How do you do , Mrs . Ford ?
Mr . Frank Churchill did not come .
Could the event of the disclosure bear an equal resemblance !-- But of that , unfortunately , there could be no chance .
Richard ?-- I saw you the other day as you rode through the town -- Mrs . Otway , I protest !-- and good Mr . Otway , and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline .-- Such a host of friends !-- and Mr . George and Mr .
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it ."
" Ah !
Cole was saying the other day she wanted something from Kingston ."
" She must have some motive , more powerful than appears , for refusing this invitation ," was Emma ' s conclusion .
She must see more of him to understand his ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable .
" My dear , you do not understand me .
There is no hurry at all .
There is something so shocking in a child ' s being taken away from his parents and natural home !
He seemed to have all the life and spirit , cheerful feelings , and social inclinations of his father , and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe .
A few minutes more , and Emma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house , to get sober and cool , and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visit of hardship were over .
" Where -- may I ask ?-- is Miss Fairfax going ?"
We always say what we like to one another ."
The loss of the ball -- the loss of the young man -- and all that the young man might be feeling !-- It was too wretched !-- Such a delightful evening as it would have been !-- Every body so happy !
They have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ; and Mrs . Martin talks of taking a boy another year ."
replied Miss Bates .
" By the bye ," said Frank Churchill to Mrs . Weston presently , " what became of Mr . Perry ' s plan of setting up his carriage ?"
said she , with a conscious look .
You shall have a charming wife ."
" Oh , dear ," cried Harriet , " now I recollect what you mean ; but I was thinking of something very different at the time .
" Ah !"
" He should be happy to see Mrs . Goddard .
He had his shepherd ' s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her .
" Yes -- I have some right to that knowledge ; though I have never been at the place in my life .-- She is an odd woman !-- But I never allow myself to speak ill of her , on Frank ' s account ; for I do believe her to be very fond of him .
" Aye , that will be much best ," said Harriet , quite satisfied , " I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs .
Emma felt that she could not do too much for her , that Harriet had a right to all her ingenuity and all her patience ; but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing without producing any effect , for ever agreed to , without being able to make their opinions the same .
When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with , of her excellence and patience , and my uncle ' s generosity , I am mad with joy : but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her , and how little I deserve to be forgiven , I am mad with anger .
I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description .
" Nothing at all .
I hope she is well ?"
But a farmer can need none of my help , and is , therefore , in one sense , as much above my notice as in every other he is below it ."
Cannot you imagine , Mr . Knightley , what a _sensation_ his coming will produce ?
the letter had much better be all your own .
I ' d rather you would ."
He has those to please who must be pleased , and who ( between ourselves ) are sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices .
John Knightley came ; but Mr . Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day .
" You are so noble in your ideas !"
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella ' s invitation ; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it , without resorting to invention .-- There was a tooth amiss .
Emma could not bear to give him pain .
" There might be scruples of delicacy , my dear Emma .
The marriage of Lieut .
" Has your son been with you , then ?"
It was better to pay my visit , then "--
It darted through her , with the speed of an arrow , that Mr . Knightley must marry no one but herself !
Emma recollected , blushed , was sorry , but tried to laugh it off .
" We should not like her so well as we do , sir , if we could suppose it ; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor ' s advantage ; she knows how very acceptable it must be , at Miss Taylor ' s time of life , to be settled in a home of her own , and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision , and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure .
" No , but it did not absolutely rain when I set out ."
As soon as she came to her own name , it was irresistible ; every line relating to herself was interesting , and almost every line agreeable ; and when this charm ceased , the subject could still maintain itself , by the natural return of her former regard for the writer , and the very strong attraction which any picture of love must have for her at that moment .
They were stopping , however , in the first place at Mrs . Bates ' s ; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford ' s ; and had all but knocked , when Emma caught their eye .-- Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the agreeableness of yesterday ' s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
As for _his_ going , Emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
He is in Highbury every now and then , and he is sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston .
Emma and Harriet had been walking together one morning , and , in Emma ' s opinion , had been talking enough of Mr . Elton for that day .
_Now_ you have nothing to try for .
" As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again .
` Well ,' said she , ` it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now .'
" True , sir ; and Emma , because she had Miss Fairfax ."
" You are extremely kind ," replied Miss Bates , highly gratified ; " you who are such a judge , and write so beautifully yourself .
You are very kind to bring me these interesting particulars .
He never read the Romance of the Forest , nor The Children of the Abbey .
Lord of the earth and sea , he bends a slave , And woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
" It is very natural .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
He brought all the music to her , and they looked it over together .-- Emma took the opportunity of whispering ,
She was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happy wife together , without feeling uncomfortable .
Her views of improving her little friend ' s mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , had never yet led to more than a few first chapters , and the intention of going on to - morrow .
" Upon my word !
It was not very long , though rather longer than Mr . Weston had foreseen , before she had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill ' s feelings .
" I am very sure that I never said any thing of either to the other , which both might not have heard ."
If it were to be shared with the woman he loved , he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house .
I do not care for myself .
" Yes -- entirely her own doing , entirely her own choice ; and Colonel and Mrs . Campbell think she does quite right , just what they should recommend ; and indeed they particularly _wish_ her to try her native air , as she has not been quite so well as usual lately ."
-- And Emma distinctly heard him add , in a lower tone , before he quitted the room ,--" I have been as good as my word .
I do indeed .
I have a great regard for you and Emma ; but when it comes to the question of dependence or independence !-- At any rate , it must be better to have only one to please than two ."
He listened with all due deference ; acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same -- but yet he must confess , that to him nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health .
She believed he was very clever , and understood every thing .
` Oh !'
I should be unwilling , I own , to live in any other part of the town ;-- there is hardly any other that I could be satisfied to have my children in : but _we_ are so remarkably airy !-- Mr .
" You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax , sir , are you ?"
It may be possible to do without dancing entirely .
returned Mr . Knightley , with energy .
If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days ; I was always glad he did not come at Christmas ; now we are going to have just the right weather for him , fine , dry , settled weather .
Colonel Campbell , you know , is quite our angel .
It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage .
They are very important -- and sorry I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them .
said Emma , laughing .
" I am quite easy on that head ," replied Mrs . Weston .
" My first enjoyment ," replied John Knightley , as they passed through the sweep - gate , " will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again ."
cried Emma , after a moment ' s pause --" What do you mean ?-- Good Heaven !
They will have their barouche - landau , of course , which holds four perfectly ; and therefore , without saying any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
" No , indeed you are mistaken ."
" I shall never be invited to Abbey - Mill again ," was said in rather a sorrowful tone .
This is what we all feel .
She was in no hurry at all .
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
But Mr . Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits , not at all to confuse his intellects .
