" I am glad you think so ; and the good hands , I hope , may not be wanting ."
After this speech he was gone as soon as possible .
It was a pity that she had not come back earlier !
You do not mean it ?"
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
I cannot keep my eyes from it .
I wonder which she will think the handsomest , Henry or John ?"
I know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect .-- I think we shall never materially disagree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you by a long preface .-- We are quite well .-- This letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness I have been feeling lately .-- I did not quite like your looks on Tuesday , but it was an ungenial morning ; and though you will never own being affected by weather , I think every body feels a north - east wind .-- I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning , but had the comfort of hearing last night , by Mr . Perry , that it had not made him ill . " Yours ever , " A . W ."
Six years hence , if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the same rank as his own , with a little money , it might be very desirable ."
" There was a strong expectation of his coming soon after the marriage , but it ended in nothing ; and I have not heard him mentioned lately ."
The weather affected Mr . Woodhouse , and he could only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter ' s side , and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before .
" He came to their father upon some business , and he asked him to stay to dinner ."
Good Mrs . Stokes would not know her own room again .
It was badly done , indeed !
She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane Fairfax ' s feelings ; and they followed the other ladies out of the room , arm in arm , with an appearance of good - will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each .
" Never , madam ," cried he , affronted in his turn : " never , I assure you .
Emma remained in a state of vexation too ; but there was more indistinctness in the causes of her ' s , than in his .
Though she did not feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before , or an hour before , its interest soon increased ; and before their first conversation was over , she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity , wonder and regret , pain and pleasure , as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins , which could conduce to place the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy .
" Something that would do !"
She was then interrupted by Harriet ' s coming in ; and if Harriet ' s praise could have satisfied her , she might soon have been comforted .
and she and her partner the happiest !--" I said it would be so ," was the only consolation .
she found something else must be done .
While poor Mrs . Churchill lived , I suppose there could not have been a hope , a chance , a possibility ;-- but scarcely are her remains at rest in the family vault , than her husband is persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she would have required .
I am resolved to have some in an ornament for the head .
" It is hotter to - day ."
I am no young lady on her preferment .
" Oh !"
Now , however , it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed , and very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond , a few lines from Frank , to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change , and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty - four hours at any given time , induced them to name as early a day as possible .
The Woodhouses were first in consequence there .
She read it to him , just as he liked to have any thing read , slowly and distinctly , and two or three times over , with explanations of every part as she proceeded -- and he was very much pleased , and , as she had foreseen , especially struck with the complimentary conclusion .
The beginning , however , of every visit displayed none but the properest feelings , and this being of necessity so short might be hoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality .
" No , sir ," replied his son , laughing , " I seem to have had it from nobody .-- Very odd !-- I really was persuaded of Mrs . Weston ' s having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe , many weeks ago , with all these particulars -- but as she declares she never heard a syllable of it before , of course it must have been a dream .
He would be always coming over .
I shall never forget his flying Henry ' s kite for him that very windy day last Easter -- and ever since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing that note , at twelve o ' clock at night , on purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham , I have been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence .-- If any body can deserve him , it must be Miss Taylor ."
It seems an impossibility !-- You cannot mean to say , that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin .
How that visit was to be acknowledged -- what would be necessary -- and what might be safest , had been a point of some doubtful consideration .
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
To Mr . John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility .
My dear Harriet , what do you mean ?
That is what she writes about .
CHAPTER I
Martin ?"
You , whom she had known from an infant , whom she had seen grow up from a period when her notice was an honour , to have you now , in thoughtless spirits , and the pride of the moment , laugh at her , humble her -- and before her niece , too -- and before others , many of whom ( certainly _some_ ,) would be entirely guided by _your_ treatment of her .-- This is not pleasant to you , Emma -- and it is very far from pleasant to me ; but I must , I will ,-- I will tell you truths while I can ; satisfied with proving myself your friend by very faithful counsel , and trusting that you will some time or other do me greater justice than you can do now ."
" Was he agreeable ?"
You have been no friend to Harriet Smith , Emma .
A very few to - morrows stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness .
My dear Isabella , I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr . Perry yet ; and he never forgets you ."
Her way was clear , though not quite smooth .-- She spoke then , on being so entreated .-- What did she say ?-- Just what she ought , of course .
He knows he is wrong , and has nothing rational to urge .-- Bad .-- He ought not to have formed the engagement .--` His father ' s disposition :'-- he is unjust , however , to his father .
Come , he knows himself there .
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive .
" Oh !
It is my party .
I must order the carriage .
" But what are you in doubt of ?
" No more it is ."
" Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would ."
Mr . Weston , on his side , added a virtue to the account which must have some weight .
it shews what a sad invalid I am !
They must not do less than others , or she should be exposed to odious suspicions , and imagined capable of pitiful resentment .
But you , who have known Miss Fairfax from a child , must be a better judge of her character , and of how she is likely to conduct herself in critical situations , than I can be ."
It must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !--
While you were in the smallest degree wavering , I said nothing about it , because I would not influence ; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me .
But you are too good for that , I am sure ."
" It is as well , perhaps , that I have not had the possibility .
To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma ' s , though under temporary gloom at night , the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of spirits .
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
You are trying not to smile ."
It was all right , all open , all equal .
" On your side , my love , it was very innocently done .
South End is an unhealthy place .
Mr . Elton was only too happy .
If they are not put off , he cannot stir .
All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject , but I believed none of it .
He had never been an unhappy man ; his own temper had secured him from that , even in his first marriage ; but his second must shew him how delightful a well - judging and truly amiable woman could be , and must give him the pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen , to excite gratitude than to feel it .
And , indeed , though my mother ' s eyes are not so good as they were , she can see amazingly well still , thank God !
" So much the better -- or so much the worse :-- I do not know which .
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman , rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers , and decent enough to have always wished for concealment .-- Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for !-- It was likely to be as untainted , perhaps , as the blood of many a gentleman : but what a connexion had she been preparing for Mr . Knightley -- or for the Churchills -- or even for Mr .
I will take it home with me at night ."
Mrs . Elton , very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her by such a hope , smiled most graciously .
You left nothing undone .
" And then their uncle comes in , and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way !"
she replied with a smile of astonishment , " are you imagining me to be Mr . Elton ' s object ?"
She could not bear to see him suffering , to know him fancying himself neglected ; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr . Knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated -- she could not proceed .
" He has not been here yet ," replied Emma .
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been so .
There is safety in reserve , but no attraction .
She was deeply ashamed , and a little afraid of his next look .
Emma seriously hoped she would .
cried the good - hearted Mrs . John Knightley .
Mr . Weston had been so very earnest in his entreaties for her arriving there as soon as possible after themselves , for the purpose of taking her opinion as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other persons came , that she could not refuse him , and must therefore spend some quiet interval in the young man ' s company .
To Mr . John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility .
An unpretending , single - minded , artless girl -- infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs . Elton .
I am perfectly comfortable to - day ."
" Well , go on ."
The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet , which this one article marked , gave her severe pain .
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much -- but she did not know -- and so , she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do .--" Emma was half - ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful .
He had been too much expected by the best judges , for surprize -- but there was great joy .
As to her illness , all nothing of course .
But still I cannot imagine she would not be persuaded ."
