All was safe and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another , Emma , being now certain of her ball , began to adopt as the next vexation Mr . Knightley ' s provoking indifference about it .
Oh !-- you need not be afraid of owning it to me , for Mr . Weston has told me himself .
This was the fact .
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs . Goddard ' s hands to shift as she can ;-- to move , in short , in Mrs . Goddard ' s line , to have Mrs . Goddard ' s acquaintance .
CHAPTER XI
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been so .
" Yes , Frank came over this morning , just to ask us how we did ."
yes , gloves and every thing .
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken .
If she has fancied otherwise , her own wishes have misled her , and I am very sorry -- extremely sorry -- But , Miss Smith , indeed !-- Oh !
Have you heard the news ?
I am amazed that you should think of such a thing ."
cried Mr . Weston , " about Perry and a carriage ?
And the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors , the more I shall like you ."
He came to ask me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early ; whether I thought her too young : in short , whether I approved his choice altogether ; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered ( especially since _your_ making so much of her ) as in a line of society above him .
Mrs . Weston , kind - hearted and musical , was particularly interested by the circumstance , and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject ; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine ' s countenance .
The subject followed ; it was in plain , unaffected , gentlemanlike English , such as Mr . Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with , how to be able to ask her to marry him , without attacking the happiness of her father .
I should be quite in the way .
I cannot let you continue in your error ; and yet , perhaps , since my manners gave such an impression , I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have been at all attached to the person we are speaking of , as it might be natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse .-- But I never have ."
Not a creature knowing it but themselves -- neither the Campbells , nor her family , nor his .-- It is so wonderful , that though perfectly convinced of the fact , it is yet almost incredible to myself .
no , I am sure you are a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise me what I had best do -- No , no , I do not mean that -- As you say , one ' s mind ought to be quite made up -- One should not be hesitating -- It is a very serious thing .-- It will be safer to say ` No ,' perhaps .-- Do you think I had better say ` No ?'"
Harriet was silent .
It was well that he took every body ' s joy for granted , or he might not have thought either Mr . Woodhouse or Mr . Knightley particularly delighted .
She knows now what gentlemen are ; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner has any chance with Harriet ."
Yes , I immediately perceive that it must be the joint present of Mr . and Mrs . Dixon .
I am sorry Mr . and Mrs . Cole should have done it .
What a letter the man writes !"
Time did not compose her .
I want you to save yourself from greater pain .
Composure with a witness !
Here am I come down for only one day , and you are engaged with a dinner - party !-- When did it happen before , or any thing like it ?
Every body is asleep !"
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me !
Absence , with the conviction probably of her indifference , had produced this very natural and very desirable effect .
Well , ( smiling ,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers , it has done all that is truly important .
I shall just go round by Mrs . Cole ' s ; but I shall not stop three minutes : and , Jane , you had better go home directly -- I would not have you out in a shower !-- We think she is the better for Highbury already .
She gained on them , however , involuntarily : the child ' s pace was quick , and theirs rather slow ; and she was the more concerned at it , from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them .
Excellent dancing indeed !-- Yes , my dear , I ran home , as I said I should , to help grandmama to bed , and got back again , and nobody missed me .-- I set off without saying a word , just as I told you .
What a strange thing love is !
She calls you , Knightley -- what can she do for Mr . Cole ?
what a bloom of full health , and such a pretty height and size ; such a firm and upright figure !
My acquaintance is so very extensive , that I have little doubt of hearing of something to suit her shortly .-- I shall introduce her , of course , very particularly to my brother and sister when they come to us .
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs . Elton ' s way before -- and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness ."
" I admired your resolution very much , sir ," said he , " in venturing out in such weather , for of course you saw there would be snow very soon .
His eldest daughter ' s alarm was equal to his own .
Let us wait , therefore , for this letter .
Observe the turn of her throat .
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken .
Mr . Weston was following ; but Mrs . Elton detained him , to gratify him by her opinion of his son ; and so briskly did she begin , that the young man himself , though by no means moving slowly , could hardly be out of hearing .
Selina has entirely given up music -- never touches the instrument -- though she played sweetly .
" She has had the advantage , you know , of practising on me ," she continued --" like La Baronne d ' Almane on La Comtesse d ' Ostalis , in Madame de Genlis ' Adelaide and Theodore , and we shall now see her own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan ."
" Not at all , sir .
" Dear Miss Woodhouse !"
" As soon as my aunt gets well , I shall go abroad ," said he .
" I have to thank you , Miss Woodhouse , for a very kind forgiving message in one of Mrs . Weston ' s letters .
" I often feel concern ," said she , " that I dare not make our carriage more useful on such occasions .
" Middling , my dear ; I cannot compliment you .
But this does not acquit _him_ , Mrs . Weston ; and I must say , that I think him greatly to blame .
But I know they will , because it is a family that a certain lady , of some consequence , at Enscombe , has a particular dislike to : and though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two or three years , they always are put off when it comes to the point .
I assure you I have no doubt of its doing Mr . Woodhouse good ."
" And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while ; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure ."
Do you really think it a bad thing ?-- why so ?"
But I believe I am nice ; I do not like strange voices ; and nobody speaks like you and poor Miss Taylor .
She was obliged , in spite of her previous determination to the contrary , to do it all the justice that Mrs . Weston foretold .
She seemed bent on giving no real insight into Mr . Dixon ' s character , or her own value for his company , or opinion of the suitableness of the match .
" A bad thing !
Every body had a degree of gravity and sorrow ; tenderness towards the departed , solicitude for the surviving friends ; and , in a reasonable time , curiosity to know where she would be buried .
The son looked convinced .
" Whoever might be her parents ," said Mr . Knightley , " whoever may have had the charge of her , it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society .
She knows I would not offend for the world .
My mother does not hear ; she is a little deaf you know .
The good was all to myself , by making you an object of the tenderest affection to me .
I had no right to expect much , and I did not expect much ; but I had no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air .
This was very proper ; the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable ; but it should have lasted longer .
So then , I try to put it out of her thoughts , and say , Come ma ' am , do not let us think about it any more ."
Harriet , who had been standing in no unhappy reverie , was yet very glad to be called from it , by the now encouraging manner of such a judge , and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse , and only wanted invitation , to give the history of her hopes with great , though trembling delight .-- Emma ' s tremblings as she asked , and as she listened , were better concealed than Harriet ' s , but they were not less .
I cannot see you acting wrong , without a remonstrance .
" Time , my dearest Emma , time will heal the wound .-- Your own excellent sense -- your exertions for your father ' s sake -- I know you will not allow yourself --."
" I always told you she was -- a little ; but you will soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome , all that has its foundation in diffidence .
for the very moment Mr . Cole told Mrs . Cole of it , she sat down and wrote to me .
You will laugh at my warmth -- but , upon my word , I talk of nothing but Jane Fairfax .-- And her situation is so calculated to affect one !-- Miss Woodhouse , we must exert ourselves and endeavour to do something for her .
Emma ' s only surprize was that Jane Fairfax should accept those attentions and tolerate Mrs . Elton as she seemed to do .
Emma could not doubt .
CHAPTER XIX
" Oh !"
She had heard and seen it all ; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any .
It was not likely , however , that any body should have equalled her in the date of the plan , as it had entered her brain during the very first evening of Harriet ' s coming to Hartfield .
Emma accepted it with a very eager hand , with an impatience all alive to know what he would say about it , and not at all checked by hearing that her friend was unmentioned .
A few awkward moments passed , and he sat down again ; and in a more determined manner said ,
Natural enough !-- his own mind full of intrigue , that he should suspect it in others .-- Mystery ; Finesse -- how they pervert the understanding !
To restrain him as much as might be , by her own manners , she was immediately preparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of the weather and the night ; but scarcely had she begun , scarcely had they passed the sweep - gate and joined the other carriage , than she found her subject cut up -- her hand seized -- her attention demanded , and Mr . Elton actually making violent love to her : availing himself of the precious opportunity , declaring sentiments which must be already well known , hoping -- fearing -- adoring -- ready to die if she refused him ; but flattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love and unexampled passion could not fail of having some effect , and in short , very much resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible .
I hope you turned directly ."
And besides the operation of this , as a general principle , you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs . Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner ; and that , face to face , Mrs . Elton treats her with all the respect which she has a claim to .
That , you know , was so very .
" I am here on no business of my own ," said Emma ; " I am only waiting for my friend .
If any thing , you are too attentive .
" Have you indeed , sir ?-- Bless me !
" But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax !"
Did not keep the horses a moment .
He stays till to - morrow , and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend the day with us .-- They are coming in , I hope ."
