The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally understood .
While she talked of his son , Mr . Weston ' s attention was chained ; but when she got to Maple Grove , he could recollect that there were ladies just arriving to be attended to , and with happy smiles must hurry away .
" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on this occasion , Miss Fairfax .
He was not in his best spirits , but seemed trying to improve them ; and , at last , made himself talk nonsense very agreeably .
-- said Emma , still perplexed .
Perfectly remember Mrs . Perry ' s coming .-- Extraordinary dream , indeed !"
We explored to King ' s - Weston twice last summer , in that way , most delightfully , just after their first having the barouche - landau .
" Upon my word ," exclaimed Emma , " you amuse me !
she was considerably worse from this reappearance of Mr . Elton .
" Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills , I fancy ," observed Mr . John Knightley coolly .
It confesses that you have long understood me ."
and so forth -- I always felt that something would happen in our favour ; and so it has , you see .
At Christmas every body invites their friends about them , and people think little of even the worst weather .
As a counsellor she was not wanted ; but as an approver , ( a much safer character ,) she was truly welcome .
He praised her for being without art or affectation , for having simple , honest , generous , feelings .-- She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet ; he had dwelt on them to her more than once .-- Much that lived in Harriet ' s memory , many little particulars of the notice she had received from him , a look , a speech , a removal from one chair to another , a compliment implied , a preference inferred , had been unnoticed , because unsuspected , by Emma .
They joined company and proceeded together .
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry - out upon her extreme good luck .
I have another person ' s interest at present so much at heart , that I cannot think any longer about Frank Churchill .
" Your command ?-- Yes ."
They remained but a few minutes together , as Miss Woodhouse must not be kept waiting ; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face , and in a flutter of spirits , which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose .
Mr . Knightley and Harriet Smith !-- It was a union to distance every wonder of the kind .-- The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax became commonplace , threadbare , stale in the comparison , exciting no surprize , presenting no disparity , affording nothing to be said or thought .-- Mr .
Oh !
Elton ?"
" Isabella and Emma both write beautifully ," said Mr . Woodhouse ; " and always did .
Emma , on reaching home , called the housekeeper directly , to an examination of her stores ; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note .
Without his sanction I could not hope to be listened to again .-- I spoke ; circumstances were in my favour ; the late event had softened away his pride , and he was , earlier than I could have anticipated , wholly reconciled and complying ; and could say at last , poor man !
It is to be a morning scheme , you know , Knightley ; quite a simple thing .
I give you notice that as I find your son , so I shall judge of him .-- I am no flatterer ."
" I rather wonder that it was never made before ."
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
It will not be so great a loss of time : but if you dislike it --"
Oh !
" Oh !
Jane often says , when she is here , ` I am sure , grandmama , you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do -- and so much fine work as you have done too !-- I only wish my eyes may last me as well .'"
She had been thinking of him the moment before , as unquestionably sixteen miles distant .-- There was time only for the quickest arrangement of mind .
" Quite wrong , my dear aunt ; there is no likeness at all ."
My daughter and I are both highly sensible of your goodness , and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you at Hartfield ."
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure .
Consider from how partial a quarter your information came .
Elton ?"
you clever creature , that ' s very true .
" I doubt its being very clever myself ," said Mr . Weston .
I would rather not be tempted .
If it can be contrived to be at the Crown , papa , it will be very convenient for the horses .
We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe , and with Mrs . Churchill ' s temper , before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew can do .
" There is no necessity for my calling this morning ," said the young man ; " another day would do as well ; but there was that degree of acquaintance at Weymouth which --"
I always fetch the letters when I am here .
" I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man .
Mr . Churchill , independent of his wife , was feared by nobody ; an easy , guidable man , to be persuaded into any thing by his nephew .
My playing is no more like her ' s , than a lamp is like sunshine ."
You can borrow Mrs . Cole ' s .
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
I have neglected her too long .
I am no young lady on her preferment .
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
It is such a happiness when good people get together -- and they always do .
" Yes ; my father is to join me here : we shall walk back together , and I must be off immediately .
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply : and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr . Elton ' s sanguine state of mind , he tried to take her hand again , as he joyously exclaimed --
` Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself !'
" No , upon no account in the world , Mr . Weston ; I am much obliged to you for reminding me .
" Do you dare to suppose me so great a blockhead , as not to know what a man is talking of ?-- What do you deserve ?"
She was a little shocked at the want of two drawing rooms , at the poor attempt at rout - cakes , and there being no ice in the Highbury card - parties .
A note was written to urge it .
Some might think him , and others might think her , the most in luck .
She had not advanced many yards from Mrs . Goddard ' s door , when she was met by Mr . Elton himself , evidently coming towards it , and as they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid -- of whom he , on the rumour of considerable illness , had been going to inquire , that he might carry some report of her to Hartfield -- they were overtaken by Mr . John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell , with his two eldest boys , whose healthy , glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run , and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for .
" He wrote a letter to poor Mrs . Weston , to congratulate her , and a very proper , handsome letter it was .
Knightley and Harriet Smith !-- Such an elevation on her side !
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
But you will do every thing right .
The rich brother - in - law near Bristol was the pride of the alliance , and his place and his carriages were the pride of him .
My dear sir , you are too obliging .
" Only one more , papa ; only for Mr . Elton .
If I come , I shall be cross ."
It would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well ."
said I , ` it is Miss Woodhouse : I am sure you will like to see her .'
Manners were all that could be safely judged of , under a much longer knowledge than they had yet had of Mr . Churchill .
" I dare say your apologies were accepted , sir .
Mr . Elton was still talking , still engaged in some interesting detail ; and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday ' s party at his friend Cole ' s , and that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese , the north Wiltshire , the butter , the cellery , the beet - root , and all the dessert .
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
After a little more discourse in praise of gruel , with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by every body , he proceeded to say , with an air of grave reflection ,
Harriet smiled again , and her smiles grew stronger .
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory ; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness , which at that moment would have been dreadful penance , by the sound of her father ' s footsteps .
He came with Mrs . Weston , to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially .
Those who can barely live , and who live perforce in a very small , and generally very inferior , society , may well be illiberal and cross .
" It is one thing ," said she , presently -- her cheeks in a glow --" to have very good sense in a common way , like every body else , and if there is any thing to say , to sit down and write a letter , and say just what you must , in a short way ; and another , to write verses and charades like this ."
I was convinced there were two , and there is but one .
She thinks nobody equal to him ."
I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere .
" Oh !
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her ; and she goes so seldom from home ."
" Me !"
Her care and attention could not be questioned ; they were , in fact , only too great .
" Yes , I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him ."
She shewed it to me .
You are more likely to have done harm to yourself , than good to them , by interference ."
" My mother ' s deafness is very trifling you see -- just nothing at all .
We must do whatever is to be done quickest , and I think our feelings will lose no time there .
Ambition , as well as love , had probably been mortified .
Emma returned her friend ' s pressure with interest ; and was pleased enough to exclaim ,
