" It is too much a matter of fact , but here it is .-- What two letters of the alphabet are there , that express perfection ?"
He would not ask Harriet to dance if it were possible to be avoided : she was sure he would not -- and she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card - room .
Mr . Weston ' s sanguine temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertions ; but Mr . Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it .-- Very true ; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here ."
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
Miss Smith , pray take care .
The prospect before her now , was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled -- that might not be even partially brightened .
" To be sure we do ," cried his father ; " Mrs . Bates -- we passed her house -- I saw Miss Bates at the window .
She was not obliged to hear .
There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman ' s daughter , and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your own power , or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you ."
" Ah !-- so you say ; but I cannot believe it ."
my dear ,' said I -- well , and just then came the note .
But how shall I do ?
" Very true ," he gravely replied ; " it was very bad ."
The most unaccountable business !
She knows their ways best ; but I should not consider their silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present .
I shall have many fellow - mourners for the ball , if not for Frank Churchill ; but Mr . Knightley will be happy .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
He was coming through the hall .
He could not say that he was sorry on his own account ; his very cheerful look would have contradicted him if he had ; but he said , and very steadily , that he was sorry for the disappointment of the others , and with considerable kindness added ,
Mrs . Weston remained with Mr . Woodhouse .
Serious she was , very serious in her thankfulness , and in her resolutions ; and yet there was no preventing a laugh , sometimes in the very midst of them .
Emma thought first of herself , and then of Harriet .
Mr . Weston -- ( laughing affectedly ) I must protest against that .-- A most dangerous precedent indeed !-- I beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example .-- Upon my word , if this is what I am to expect , we married women must begin to exert ourselves !-- Oh !
It must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !--
I admire all that quaint , old - fashioned politeness ; it is much more to my taste than modern ease ; modern ease often disgusts me .
Something of that nature would be particularly desirable for _me_ , as an inducement to keep me in practice ; for married women , you know -- there is a sad story against them , in general .
It was very natural for you to say , what right has he to lecture me ?-- and I am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner .
no , upon my word I have not the smallest wish for your marrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body .
" What can it be , Miss Woodhouse ?-- what can it be ?
The terror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then their own portion .
There was one , however , which Emma thought something of .-- The two last dances before supper were begun , and Harriet had no partner ;-- the only young lady sitting down ;-- and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers , that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder !-- But Emma ' s wonder lessened soon afterwards , on seeing Mr . Elton sauntering about .
" I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother ," cried Emma , " about your friend Mr . Graham ' s intending to have a bailiff from Scotland , to look after his new estate .
She has been taught nothing useful , and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself .
The heat even would be danger .-- You are fatigued already ."
Oh !
I do not advise you to give way to it , Harriet .
The lovers were standing together at one of the windows .
I did not immediately recollect .
" Miss Woodhouse , as you will not give me your opinion , I must do as well as I can by myself ; and I have now quite determined , and really almost made up my mind -- to refuse Mr . Martin .
" This is a pleasure ," said he , in rather a low voice , " coming at least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated .
Mrs . Bates , the widow of a former vicar of Highbury , was a very old lady , almost past every thing but tea and quadrille .
She went to Mrs . Goddard ' s accordingly the very next day , to undergo the necessary penance of communication ; and a severe one it was .-- She had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding -- to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred -- and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis - judging in all her ideas on one subject , all her observations , all her convictions , all her prophecies for the last six weeks .
Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday , and spoke of it as for Saturday ."
She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she found it ; but she fully intended that Mr . Elton should close it .
" I like your plan ," cried Mr . Weston .
Ah !
" Not to my feelings .
CHAPTER I
It was a done thing ; Mr . Elton was to go , and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment ; never had his smile been stronger , nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her .
" I had no notion that he liked me so very much ," said Harriet , contemplating the letter .
You want your neighbours ' opinions .
He was coming through the hall .
Mr . Perry had been to Mrs . Goddard ' s to attend a sick child , and Miss Nash had seen him , and he had told Miss Nash , that as he was coming back yesterday from Clayton Park , he had met Mr . Elton , and found to his great surprize , that Mr . Elton was actually on his road to London , and not meaning to return till the morrow , though it was the whist - club night , which he had been never known to miss before ; and Mr . Perry had remonstrated with him about it , and told him how shabby it was in him , their best player , to absent himself , and tried very much to persuade him to put off his journey only one day ; but it would not do ; Mr . Elton had been determined to go on , and had said in a _very_ _particular_ way indeed , that he was going on business which he would not put off for any inducement in the world ; and something about a very enviable commission , and being the bearer of something exceedingly precious .
With Mr . Weston ' s ball in view at least , there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things ; but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composure as could stand against the actual approach -- new carriage , bell - ringing , and all .
How they were all to be conveyed , he would have made a difficulty if he could , but as his son and daughter ' s carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield , he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head ; it hardly amounted to a doubt ; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also .
But is it possible that you had no suspicion ?-- I mean of late .
Whenever James goes over to see his daughter , you know , she will be hearing of us .
How the delicacy , the discretion of his favourite could have been so lain asleep !
" If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill , I have heard that already ."
I could suppose she might in time -- but can she already ?-- Did not you misunderstand him ?-- You were both talking of other things ; of business , shows of cattle , or new drills -- and might not you , in the confusion of so many subjects , mistake him ?-- It was not Harriet ' s hand that he was certain of -- it was the dimensions of some famous ox ."
She could not enter the house again , could not be in the same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago , to lace up her boot , without _recollecting_ .
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr . Knightley till after supper ; but , when they were all in the ballroom again , her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked .
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance , and was beyond the reach of Mr . Weston ' s hint .
This must not be ."
He could not see her in a situation of such danger , without trying to preserve her .
The next question was --
" Yes -- rather -- I have been thinking of it some little time ."
She must have been a perpetual enemy .
There is no use in delay .
Emma , on reaching home , called the housekeeper directly , to an examination of her stores ; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatched to Miss Bates with a most friendly note .
How could she have been so brutal , so cruel to Miss Bates !
MY DEAR MADAM ,
I will call another day , and hear the pianoforte ."
" Dear Emma bears every thing so well ," said her father .
I have now a key to all her odd looks and ways .
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look ; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be charmed .-- There was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell .
There was not a dissentient voice on the subject , either when Mrs . Perry drank tea with Mrs . and Miss Bates , or when Mrs . and Miss Bates returned the visit .
Mrs . Weston said no more ; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat .
" Oh !
no -- I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it .
I am quite determined to refuse him .
How the trampers might have behaved , had the young ladies been more courageous , must be doubtful ; but such an invitation for attack could not be resisted ; and Harriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children , headed by a stout woman and a great boy , all clamorous , and impertinent in look , though not absolutely in word .-- More and more frightened , she immediately promised them money , and taking out her purse , gave them a shilling , and begged them not to want more , or to use her ill .-- She was then able to walk , though but slowly , and was moving away -- but her terror and her purse were too tempting , and she was followed , or rather surrounded , by the whole gang , demanding more .
" But , my dear papa , you are no friend to matrimony ; and therefore why should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_ ?
She had understood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell ' s return ."
But you know what I am .-- You hear nothing but truth from me .-- I have blamed you , and lectured you , and you have borne it as no other woman in England would have borne it .-- Bear with the truths I would tell you now , dearest Emma , as well as you have borne with them .
His manner had no air of study or exaggeration .
" Mr . Knightley was there too , was he ?"
I come in for a pretty good share as a second .
or is it too short ?"
I must confess it is a recommendation to me .
" It is impossible for me to doubt any longer .
There was no getting at her real opinion .
" I am glad I have done being in love with him .
.
" Yes ," replied Harriet modestly , but not fearfully --" I must say that I have ."
" They told me something ," said Harriet rather hesitatingly ;" but it is nothing of any consequence ."
Mrs . Weston , did you ever hear the like ?
I am perfectly comfortable to - day ."
Tell your aunt , little Emma , that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances , and that if she were not wrong before , she is now ."
