The shower was heavy , but short ; and it had not been over five minutes , when in came Harriet , with just the heated , agitated look which hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give ; and the " Oh !
united , ( _courtship_ , you know ,) what reverse we have !
Do not run away with such an idea ."
said she , beginning again when they were all in the street .
The Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings , and of the use to be made of their barouche - landau ; and Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother ' s ; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed , and August , instead of Midsummer , fixed for it , she was likely to remain there full two months longer , provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs . Elton ' s activity in her service , and save herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her will .
said she , quickly , looking up in his face .
Mr . Woodhouse ' s peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill - bestowed .
She recovered her voice .
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
He was the brother of her friends , and he took pains to please her ; and altogether , having seen nobody better ( that must have been his great assistant ) she might not , while she was at Abbey - Mill , find him disagreeable .
" You must make my apologies to your friend ; but so good a charade must not be confined to one or two .
And , upon my word , I do not think Mr . Knightley would be much disturbed by Miss Bates .
His son , too well bred to hear the hint , rose immediately also , saying ,
" Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument -- which must now be shut up in London , untouched by any body ."
I always regret excessively on dear Emma ' s account that she cannot be more at Highbury ; but now their daughter is married , I suppose Colonel and Mrs . Campbell will not be able to part with her at all .
They walked on .
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
" Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day , out of so few , in having your hair cut ."
He was wishing to confide in her -- perhaps to consult her ;-- cost her what it would , she would listen .
If she does wrong , she ought to feel it ."
-- Bad enough as it is , for I absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree .-- I believe I have not played a bar this fortnight .-- However , he is coming , I assure you : yes , indeed , on purpose to wait on you all ."
I dare say she did not understand me ."
Could he have thought himself encouraged , his looks and language at parting would have been different .-- Still , however , I must be on my guard .
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins ' s name was first mentioned in Highbury , before she was , by some means or other , discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when Mr . Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her Christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
No , upon my honour , there is no unsteadiness of character .
.
Her heart beat quick on hearing Harriet ' s footstep and voice ; so , she supposed , had poor Mrs . Weston felt when _she_ was approaching Randalls .
We all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou , the plainest spoken amongst us ; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other -- a something more early implanted .
" No , no ; your room is full enough .
those dear little children .
It had been a very happy fortnight , and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of Hartfield days .
" By the bye -- I have not wished you joy .
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
Jane actually on the point of going as governess !
My acquaintance with him has been but trifling .-- And even if I have not underrated him hitherto , he may yet turn out well .-- With such a woman he has a chance .-- I have no motive for wishing him ill -- and for her sake , whose happiness will be involved in his good character and conduct , I shall certainly wish him well ."
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , Lords of the earth !
replied Emma , unable to guess , by look or voice , whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint .
" Jane Fairfax !-- Good God !
" Yes -- I have some right to that knowledge ; though I have never been at the place in my life .-- She is an odd woman !-- But I never allow myself to speak ill of her , on Frank ' s account ; for I do believe her to be very fond of him .
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of your friend .
There is no use in delay .
In spite of her vexation , she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous , that she should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform by Harriet , which Mrs . Weston had just gone through by herself .
" I shall never let that book go out of my own hands ," said she .
John , the second , is named after his father .
She hoped they might now become friends again .
He came four times a day for a week .
I am sorry Mr . and Mrs . Cole should have done it .
I do not pretend to be a wit .
Emma returned all her attention to her father , saying in secret --
Do not run away with such an idea ."
" Mr . Elton , this is the most extraordinary conduct !
yes , very .
As for Isabella , she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the Mr . Westons aside as much as she can ."
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
I meant only myself .
If they are anxious to see you _happily_ married , here is a man whose amiable character gives every assurance of it ;-- if they wish to have you settled in the same country and circle which they have chosen to place you in , here it will be accomplished ; and if their only object is that you should , in the common phrase , be _well_ married , here is the comfortable fortune , the respectable establishment , the rise in the world which must satisfy them ."
You did not enjoy them as I did ; you appeared tired the whole time .
" Oh !
" I remember once calling you ` George ,' in one of my amiable fits , about ten years ago .
" Oh yes ; next week ."
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
" I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr . Elton .
He is but young , and his uncle , perhaps --"
You must have seen that I did .
What arises from discretion must be honoured ."
" You could not have visited me !"
If not wise or refined herself , she would have connected him with those who were ; but Miss Hawkins , it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit , had been the best of her own set .
I see nobody else looking like her !-- I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish fashion .
How could she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one she valued !
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
" Do you know Miss Bates ' s niece ?
" My dearest Emma , do not pretend , with your sweet temper , to understand a bad one , or to lay down rules for it : you must let it go its own way .
It was a great consolation that Mr . Elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him -- that Harriet ' s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body ' s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father ' s being given a moment ' s uneasiness about it .
Busy as he was , however , the young man was yet able to shew a most happy countenance on seeing Emma again .
It was known that they were a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was .
She was warmly gratified -- and in another moment still more so , by a little movement of more than common friendliness on his part .-- He took her hand ;-- whether she had not herself made the first motion , she could not say -- she might , perhaps , have rather offered it -- but he took her hand , pressed it , and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lips -- when , from some fancy or other , he suddenly let it go .-- Why he should feel such a scruple , why he should change his mind when it was all but done , she could not perceive .-- He would have judged better , she thought , if he had not stopped .-- The intention , however , was indubitable ; and whether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry , or however else it happened , but she thought nothing became him more .-- It was with him , of so simple , yet so dignified a nature .-- She could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction .
Mr . Perry could not quite understand him , but he was very sure there must be a _lady_ in the case , and he told him so ; and Mr . Elton only looked very conscious and smiling , and rode off in great spirits .
Emma restrained her indignation , and only turned from her in silence .
" Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , trying to be lively , but really confused -- " I am in a very extraordinary situation .
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping .
there is one difficulty unprovided for ," cried Emma .
I have no idea of that sort of thing .
Excepting inequality of fortune , and perhaps a little disparity of age , I can see nothing unsuitable ."
Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeavour to forget it ."
I must get rid of every thing .-- There it goes , and there is an end , thank Heaven !
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could , to keep him from such thoughts ; but when tea came , it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner ,
What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy ?
" But it is too far , indeed it is , to be walking quite alone .
" A very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
We never were so long without seeing her before , and as I was telling Mrs . Cole , we shall hardly know how to make enough of her now ."
The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits ; and her being left in solitary grandeur , even supposing the omission to be intended as a compliment , was but poor comfort .
And so she began inquiring after her directly , saying , ` I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately , because it is not her time for writing ;' and when I immediately said , ` But indeed we have , we had a letter this very morning ,' I do not know that I ever saw any body more surprized .
Shall we walk , Augusta ?"
I believe you did not hear me telling the others in the drawing - room that we are expecting Frank .
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style -- Candles everywhere .-- I was telling you of your grandmama , Jane ,-- There was a little disappointment .-- The baked apples and biscuits , excellent in their way , you know ; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first , and good Mr . Woodhouse , not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough , sent it all out again .
Mr . Dixon , you say , is not , strictly speaking , handsome ?"
The evil day was put off .
I can think of but one thing -- Who is in love with her ?
the best nature in the world -- a wedding ."
Would Jane but go , means were to be found , servants sent , friends contrived -- no travelling difficulty allowed to exist ; but still she had declined it !
