I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
But she had not been there two minutes when she found that Harriet ' s habits of dependence and imitation were bringing her up too , and that , in short , they would both be soon after her .
A Miss Hawkins --"
I am a talker , you know ; I am rather a talker ; and now and then I have let a thing escape me which I should not .
Emma ' s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the following day , by hearing that he was gone off to London , merely to have his hair cut .
you amuse me excessively .
His eldest daughter ' s alarm was equal to his own .
Let us make the best of it -- and , indeed , almost every thing may be fairly said in her favour .
" I am sure William Larkins will not like it .
She thought nothing of his attachment , and was insulted by his hopes .
" It will be natural for me ," he added shortly afterwards , " to speak my opinion aloud as I read .
This , you know , speaks a great degree of weakness -- but now she is so impatient to be in town , that she means to sleep only two nights on the road .-- So Frank writes word .
" Well ," said she to herself , " this is most strange !-- After I had got him off so well , to chuse to go into company , and leave Harriet ill behind !-- Most strange indeed !-- But there is , I believe , in many men , especially single men , such an inclination -- such a passion for dining out -- a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures , their employments , their dignities , almost their duties , that any thing gives way to it -- and this must be the case with Mr . Elton ; a most valuable , amiable , pleasing young man undoubtedly , and very much in love with Harriet ; but still , he cannot refuse an invitation , he must dine out wherever he is asked .
He was satisfied of there being no present danger in returning home , but no assurances could convince him that it was safe to stay ; and while the others were variously urging and recommending , Mr . Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences : thus --
Fortune I do not want ; employment I do not want ; consequence I do not want : I believe few married women are half as much mistress of their husband ' s house as I am of Hartfield ; and never , never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important ; so always first and always right in any man ' s eyes as I am in my father ' s ."
There I was quite right .
She read , and was surprized .
" Ah !
The Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings , and of the use to be made of their barouche - landau ; and Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother ' s ; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed , and August , instead of Midsummer , fixed for it , she was likely to remain there full two months longer , provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs . Elton ' s activity in her service , and save herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her will .
I did not know what to do .
He laughed rather consciously ; and though denying the sentiment , Emma was convinced that it had been so .
.
succeeded in the true English style , burying under a calmness that seemed all but indifference , the real attachment which would have led either of them , if requisite , to do every thing for the good of the other .
We were always glad to see him at Hartfield ."
What !-- engaged to her all the winter -- before either of them came to Highbury ?"
There will be a great many people talking at once .
He was afraid not even Miss Woodhouse "-- he stopt a moment --" or Miss Smith could inspire him ."
It could not be otherwise .
And now to chuse the mortification of Mrs . Elton ' s notice and the penury of her conversation , rather than return to the superior companions who have always loved her with such real , generous affection ."
" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
I found Harriet more conversable than I expected ."
and I always thought you meant it ."
He had come , in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill ' s engagement , with no selfish view , no view at all , but of endeavouring , if she allowed him an opening , to soothe or to counsel her .-- The rest had been the work of the moment , the immediate effect of what he heard , on his feelings .
She has not the least idea ."
I thought -- but I beg your pardon , perhaps I have been under a mistake .
" I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour .
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth .
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come ?
It seemed at first an accidental division , but it never materially varied .
Weston ."
Five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
I want to see you permanently well connected , and to that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be ; and , therefore , I say that if you should still be in this country when Mr . Martin marries , I wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with the sisters , to be acquainted with the wife , who will probably be some mere farmer ' s daughter , without education ."
I had not the least idea !-- Jane took Mrs . Elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs . Smallridge ' s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .-- I did not know a word of it till it was all settled ."
" To be sure we do ," cried his father ; " Mrs . Bates -- we passed her house -- I saw Miss Bates at the window .
I am sure she will be pleased with the children .
His mother and sisters were very fond of him .
Did you ever hear any thing so strange ?
She is as low as possible .
What a blessing , that she never had any children !
He did consent .
It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the country .-- The Box Hill party had decided him on going away .
And that you should have been so mistaken , is amazing !-- I am sure , but for believing that you entirely approved and meant to encourage me in my attachment , I should have considered it at first too great a presumption almost , to dare to think of him .
She was quite one of her worthies -- the most amiable , affable , delightful woman -- just as accomplished and condescending as Mrs . Elton meant to be considered .
" But still , not near enough to give me a chance of being right , if we think differently ."
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
You are so much used to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ; and , perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex , after being used to it all her life .
Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject , before the few who knew her opinion of Mrs . Elton , Mrs . Weston ventured this apology for Jane .
Every possibility of good was before me , and the first of blessings secured , in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence .
I think it is the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight .
" It is certainly very well regulated ."
Oh !
" We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage , my dear Emma -- but it is better than being always at home .
When he was speaking of it in that way , I honestly said that _the_ _world_ I could give up -- parties , balls , plays -- for I had no fear of retirement .
Though , perhaps , as the _Chaperon_ of the party -- _I_ never was in any circle -- exploring parties -- young ladies -- married women --"
I hardly know how it has happened ; a little , perhaps , from that wickedness on my side which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was , by her aunt and grandmother , and all their set .
" It is not worth while , Harriet , to give Mrs . Ford the trouble of two parcels ."
" Jane !"
he continued ; " every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !-- every day making me less fit to bear any other place .
The affection of such a man as Mr . Elton would have been too great a distinction .-- She never could have deserved him -- and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible .
Jane often says , when she is here , ` I am sure , grandmama , you must have had very strong eyes to see as you do -- and so much fine work as you have done too !-- I only wish my eyes may last me as well .'"
A Miss Hawkins --"
" Oh !"
It ought to have been a habit with him by this time , of following his duty , instead of consulting expediency .
What were nine miles to a young man ?-- An hour ' s ride .
Blessed with so many resources within myself , the world was not necessary to _me_ .
cried he .
Ma ' am ," addressing her , " do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to say about Jane ' s handwriting ?"
Emma , your infatuation about that girl blinds you .
Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party , and grew uncomfortable .
He has passed you very often ."
" It is too small -- wants strength .
I think you play quite as well as she does .
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room .
I could not think about you so much without doating on you , faults and all ; and by dint of fancying so many errors , have been in love with you ever since you were thirteen at least ."
The interest he takes in her -- his anxiety about her health -- his concern that she should have no happier prospect !
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess , who had fallen little short of a mother in affection .
Well , that is so very !-- I am sure if Jane is tired , you will be so kind as to give her your arm .-- Mr .
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies , with their servants and furniture , I think is best observed by meals within doors .
The listeners were amused ; and Mrs . Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning .
When Harriet had closed her evidence , she appealed to her dear Miss Woodhouse , to say whether she had not good ground for hope .
" Do you know Miss Bates ' s niece ?
Tea was carrying round , and Mr . Weston , having said all that he wanted , soon took the opportunity of walking away .
" How often , when you were a girl , have you said to me , with one of your saucy looks --` Mr . Knightley , I am going to do so - and - so ; papa says I may , or I have Miss Taylor ' s leave '-- something which , you knew , I did not approve .
What do you imagine his age to be ?"
" Emma , my dear Emma --"
" No , my dear , I never encouraged any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
" They told me -- that Mr . Martin dined with them last Saturday ."
They were off ; and Emma could breathe .
The hair was curled , and the maid sent away , and Emma sat down to think and be miserable .-- It was a wretched business indeed !-- Such an overthrow of every thing she had been wishing for !-- Such a development of every thing most unwelcome !-- Such a blow for Harriet !-- that was the worst of all .
If I had not promoted Mr . Weston ' s visits here , and given many little encouragements , and smoothed many little matters , it might not have come to any thing after all .
