My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well .
no -- what an impudent dog I was !-- How could I dare --"
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
" I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to - morrow .-- Mr .
" May I , indeed ?-- Then I will speak the truth , and nothing suits me so well .
There is such perfect good - temper and good - will in Mr . Elton as one cannot but value ."
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto .
" How much I am obliged to you ," said he , " for telling me to come to - day !-- If it had not been for you , I should certainly have lost all the happiness of this party .
It was her superior duty .
" What can it be , Miss Woodhouse ?-- what can it be ?
I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had been of some use ; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may .
The subject followed ; it was in plain , unaffected , gentlemanlike English , such as Mr . Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with , how to be able to ask her to marry him , without attacking the happiness of her father .
" But if I do , I shall be crosser still .
Find some body for me .
I saw a vast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove .
" Yes , papa ; we have something to read you , something quite fresh .
Did you ever hear any thing so strange ?
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from almost all the rest .
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
I think very well of Mr . Elton , and this is the only way I have of doing him a service ."
It made her animated -- open hearted -- she voluntarily said ;--
Come , Jane , take my other arm ."
It was felt as such things must be felt .
If you remember any queernesses , set them all to the right account .-- Of the pianoforte so much talked of , I feel it only necessary to say , that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss F --, who would never have allowed me to send it , had any choice been given her .-- The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement , my dear madam , is much beyond my power of doing justice to .
She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt , very worthy people ; I have known them all my life .
" Oh yes !-- there is a great difference .
" Not a walk in the rain , I should imagine ."
" Yes , I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him ."
How could you suppose me ignorant ?
And as to conceit , he is the farthest from it of any man I know .
Mrs . Weston was exceedingly disappointed -- much more disappointed , in fact , than her husband , though her dependence on seeing the young man had been so much more sober : but a sanguine temper , though for ever expecting more good than occurs , does not always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression .
replied Emma , unable to guess , by look or voice , whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint .
The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency .
Her affection must have overpowered her judgment ."
the blessing of a female correspondent , when one is really interested in the absent !-- she will tell me every thing .
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
Why should he marry ?-- He is as happy as possible by himself ; with his farm , and his sheep , and his library , and all the parish to manage ; and he is extremely fond of his brother ' s children .
You may imagine how desirable !
You pass it over very handsomely -- but you were perfectly right ."
There she sat -- and who would have guessed how many tears she had been lately shedding ?
I know what you mean -- but Emma ' s hand is the strongest ."
" Oh !
Mrs . Weston told me you were here .-- Oh !
The visit was of course short ; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being " elegantly dressed , and very pleasing ."
Seats tolerably in the shade were found ; and now Emma was obliged to overhear what Mrs . Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of .-- A situation , a most desirable situation , was in question .
I feel it so very due .
Mr . Weston must be between forty and fifty ."
I am sorry Mr . and Mrs . Cole should have done it .
Do not tell his father , but that young man is not quite the thing .
He cut her short with ,
Nothing , but to grow more worthy of him , whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own .
She asked after their mutual friends ; they were all well .-- When had he left them ?-- Only that morning .
From Frank Churchill ' s face , where he thought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away , he had involuntarily turned to hers ; but she was indeed behind , and too busy with her shawl .
it gives one exactly the idea of such a height as Miss Smith ' s .
you will never guess .
It would hold the very number for comfort .
_Now_ , he said , he was beginning to have no longer the same wish .
Knightley .-- Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ; for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet ' s ;-- and even were this not the case , he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly .
Shall I call upon them ?
" Ah !
We must look to her one fault , and remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement , to bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment ."
that is quite surprising , for we have had a vast deal of rain here .
Was not she like a daughter , his eldest daughter ?-- he must tell her ; and Miss Bates being present , it passed , of course , to Mrs . Cole , Mrs . Perry , and Mrs . Elton , immediately afterwards .
" Will Mr . Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford ?"
" How delighted I am to see you again !
Such things in general cannot be too short ."
Do not let mine continue longer .
Woman ' s usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they are now ; or with no important variation .
you answer as discreetly as she could do herself .
There is always a look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneath them .
Miss Bates , in her real anxiety for Jane , could hardly stay even to be grateful , before she stept forward and put an end to all farther singing .
I fancy I am rather a favourite ; he took notice of my gown .
He promised to join me here , and pay his respects to you ."
" Sir ," said Mr . Woodhouse , rather warmly , " you are very much mistaken if you suppose Mr . Perry to be that sort of character .
The idea of wanting gratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse , whom she really loved extremely , made her wretched for a while , and when the violence of grief was comforted away , still remained powerful enough to prompt to what was right and support her in it very tolerably .
True , true , you are acquainted with Miss Fairfax ; I remember you knew her at Weymouth , and a fine girl she is .
" Yes , you were very cross ; and I do not know what about , except that you were too late for the best strawberries .
Emma ' s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of what had passed ,-- aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion : but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible .
And here , instead of its being a matter of condolence , it turns out to be one of congratulation .-- I congratulate you , Mr . Weston , with all my heart , on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter ."
Mr . Weston must be between forty and fifty ."
Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question .
And , by the bye , can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with our opinion ?-- Pray be sincere , Knightley .
There is health , not merely in her bloom , but in her air , her head , her glance .
convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield .
It is a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ; and will be soon followed by matter - of - fact prose ."
She was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully comprehended ; and then , being quite new , farther representations were necessary to make it acceptable .
But one morning -- I forget exactly the day -- but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_ _evening_ , he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket - book ; it was about spruce - beer .
She is known only as parlour - boarder at a common school .
The carriage -- we had disappointments about the carriage ;-- one morning , I remember , he came to me quite in despair ."
The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend , was the name of Jane Fairfax .
It is a most uncommon complexion , with her dark eye - lashes and hair -- a most distinguishing complexion !
" She could not compose herself -- Mr . Woodhouse would be alarmed -- she had better go ;"-- with most ready encouragement from her friend , therefore , she passed off through another door -- and the moment she was gone , this was the spontaneous burst of Emma ' s feelings : " Oh God !
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread ; and Mr . Weston had his five minutes share of it ; but five minutes were enough to familiarise the idea to his quickness of mind .-- He saw the advantages of the match , and rejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife ; but the wonder of it was very soon nothing ; and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing that he had always foreseen it .
Now , upon his father ' s marriage , it was very generally proposed , as a most proper attention , that the visit should take place .
" Miss Fairfax ' s compliments and thanks , but is quite unequal to any exercise ."
He sat musing a little while , and then said ,
I have no business to put myself forward ."
I dare say he has ; and though it may cut him off from some advantages , it will secure him many others ."
