We are both prejudiced ; you against , I for him ; and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here ."
Harriet said , " very true ," and she " would not think about it ;" but still she talked of it -- still she could talk of nothing else ; and Emma , at last , in order to put the Martins out of her head , was obliged to hurry on the news , which she had meant to give with so much tender caution ; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry , ashamed or only amused , at such a state of mind in poor Harriet -- such a conclusion of Mr . Elton ' s importance with her !
Sixteen miles -- nay , eighteen -- it must be full eighteen to Manchester - street -- was a serious obstacle .
" There , papa !-- Now you must be satisfied -- Our own dear Mrs . Weston , who is carefulness itself .
The result of his reverie was , " No , Emma , I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize .-- I never had a thought of her in that way , I assure you ."
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella ' s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
Could not have imagined it .-- So well lighted up !-- Jane , Jane , look !-- did you ever see any thing ?
" Yes , that of course ."
It seemed as if every thing united to promise the most interesting consequences .
Mr . Frank Churchill still declined it , looking as serious as he could , and his father gave his hearty support by calling out , " My good friend , this is quite unnecessary ; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it , and as to Mrs . Bates ' s , he may get there from the Crown in a hop , step , and jump ."
But it would not do ; he had not come to the point .
He could be no judge , however , of the evil he was holding cheap .
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
Cole ."
but he hoped he should in time ."
Mr . Perry is not gone ."
She went , however ; and when they reached the farm , and she was to be put down , at the end of the broad , neat gravel walk , which led between espalier apple - trees to the front door , the sight of every thing which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before , was beginning to revive a little local agitation ; and when they parted , Emma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity , which determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed quarter of an hour .
" I dare say ," returned Harriet , sighing again , " I dare say she was very much attached to him ."
In such cases my interference was giving you two bad feelings instead of one ."
I do not know who would ever look at him in the company of the other .
When they all sat down it was better ; to her taste a great deal better , for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay , making her his first object .
Some change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked into Mrs . Weston ' s drawing - room ;-- Mr . Elton must compose his joyous looks , and Mr . John Knightley disperse his ill - humour .
But I know they will , because it is a family that a certain lady , of some consequence , at Enscombe , has a particular dislike to : and though it is thought necessary to invite them once in two or three years , they always are put off when it comes to the point .
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground did her further service , for any thing was welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present .
" I dare say ," replied Mrs . Weston , smiling , " that I thought so _then_ ;-- but since we have parted , I can never remember Emma ' s omitting to do any thing I wished ."
She is loveliness itself .
" Success supposes endeavour .
" Yes , yes , pray pass _me_ ," added her husband , with a sort of sneering consciousness ; " _I_ have nothing to say that can entertain Miss Woodhouse , or any other young lady .
She would not have been puzzled , had she dared fix on them .
She loves piquet , you know ; but when she is gone home , I am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself , instead of going to bed at your usual time -- and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort .
Later in the morning , and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o ' clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again .
Give me the book , I will write it down , and then there can be no possible reflection on you ."
You do not know what it is to have tempers to manage ."
They are all remarkably clever ; and they have so many pretty ways .
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
I am glad he can afford it .
" I am sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , excepting those little nervous head - aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free from anywhere , I am quite well myself ; and if the children were rather pale before they went to bed , it was only because they were a little more tired than usual , from their journey and the happiness of coming .
This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest .
Your marrying will be equal to the match at Randalls .
" A bad thing !
I cannot help suspecting him .
He had expressed himself as to coming , with more than common certainty .
She was obliged , in spite of her previous determination to the contrary , to do it all the justice that Mrs . Weston foretold .
If Frank Churchill had wanted to see his father , he would have contrived it between September and January .
Harriet slept at Hartfield that night .
Emma knew this was too true for contradiction , and therefore said nothing .
" This will not be your only visit to Randalls ."
Her approbation , at once general and minute , warm and incessant , could not but please ; and for another half - hour they were all walking to and fro , between the different rooms , some suggesting , some attending , and all in happy enjoyment of the future .
" Oh !
I never could comprehend how Mr . Weston could part with him .
" Ah !
I have often known it done myself ."
My behaviour , during the very happy fortnight which I spent with you , did not , I hope , lay me open to reprehension , excepting on one point .
Do not put it into his head .
They all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they were just growing again like themselves , ( Harriet , as Emma must suspect , as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy ,) when the carriage reappeared , and all was over .
It is such a blessing !
She recalled her past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen years -- how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old -- how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health -- and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood .
CHAPTER II
But what shall I say ?
I have an idea he was standing just here ."
" That may be -- but not by sketches in Swisserland .
" Did you ever see such a skin ?-- such smoothness !
It then occurred to her to employ him in reading .
" Have you indeed no idea ?"
Do not pity me till I saw her wan , sick looks .-- I reached Highbury at the time of day when , from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour , I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone .-- I was not disappointed ; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of my journey .
" Only one more , papa ; only for Mr . Elton .
In general , it was a very well approved match .
That was all very true .
It was quite a chance , he said , that he had not gone round by Randalls .
She never mentioned it before , because she would not alarm us .
` Well ,' said she , ` it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now .'
I condition for nothing else ; but without music , life would be a blank to me .'"
no , I could not endure William Coxe -- a pert young lawyer ."
" A man ," said he , " must have a very good opinion of himself when he asks people to leave their own fireside , and encounter such a day as this , for the sake of coming to see him .
Miss Smith , the step at the turning ."
cried he .
" You do quite right ," said she ;--" we will make your apologies to Mr . and Mrs .
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal , and came back all the better -- grown quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to them , take an interest in their employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
so long ago as the 7th of November , ( as I am going to read to you ,) and has never been well since .
" Yes , my dear , if there is time .-- But --( in a very depressed tone )-- she is coming for only one week .
He wished the road might be impassable , that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls ; and with the utmost good - will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body , calling on his wife to agree with him , that with a little contrivance , every body might be lodged , which she hardly knew how to do , from the consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house .
The most indefatigable , true friend .
I want a change .
And now I can see it in no other light than as an offering of love ."
said John Knightley .
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings .
What arises from discretion must be honoured ."
" It is my duty , and I am sure it is my wish ," she continued , " to have no reserves with you on this subject .
" You are quite in the right ; it was most natural to pay your visit , then "--
with a deep sigh , that he wished I might find as much happiness in the marriage state as he had done .-- I felt that it would be of a different sort .-- Are you disposed to pity me for what I must have suffered in opening the cause to him , for my suspense while all was at stake ?-- No ; do not pity me till I reached Highbury , and saw how ill I had made her .
This was Mr . Elton !
She looked on with some amusement .-- Miss Bates ' s gratitude for Mrs . Elton ' s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless simplicity and warmth .
and to see you in such excellent looks !-- I would not have missed this meeting for the world .
" A very fine young man indeed , Mr . Weston .
At another time Emma might have been amused , but she was too much astonished now at Mr . Elton ' s spirits for other feelings .
English verdure , English culture , English comfort , seen under a sun bright , without being oppressive .
My idea of the simple and the natural will be to have the table spread in the dining - room .
But in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
Her feelings altered towards Emma .-- Offended , probably , by the little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with , she drew back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant ; and though the effect was agreeable , the ill - will which produced it was necessarily increasing Emma ' s dislike .
