" He is very young to settle ," was Mr . Woodhouse ' s observation .
-- And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent , such boastful pretence of amazement , that she could not help replying with quickness ,
" We will not allow her to do such a thing again :"-- and nodding significantly --" there must be some arrangement made , there must indeed .
Mr . Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile ; and succeeded without difficulty , upon Mrs . Elton ' s beginning to talk to him .
" When I got to Donwell ," said he , " Knightley could not be found .
I must get rid of every thing .-- There it goes , and there is an end , thank Heaven !
Referring the education to her seemed to imply it .
Elton !--` Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax .'
And when you get there , you must tell him at what time you would have him come for you again ; and you had better name an early hour .
There was no time for farther remark or explanation .
Mrs . Elton , as elegant as lace and pearls could make her , he looked at in silence -- wanting only to observe enough for Isabella ' s information -- but Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance and a quiet girl , and he could talk to her .
For some time she was amused , without thinking beyond the immediate cause ; but as she came to understand the family better , other feelings arose .
I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs . Elton , by calling you Mr . K .-- But I will promise ," she added presently , laughing and blushing --" I will promise to call you once by your Christian name .
So much superadded decision of character !
" We will not allow her to do such a thing again :"-- and nodding significantly --" there must be some arrangement made , there must indeed .
" Miss Smith !-- message to Miss Smith !-- What could she possibly mean !"
Emma felt they were friends again ; and the conviction giving her at first great satisfaction , and then a little sauciness , she could not help saying , as he was admiring the baby ,
" Oh !
Very odd !
It is a most uncommon complexion , with her dark eye - lashes and hair -- a most distinguishing complexion !
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
_I_ think seriously of Miss Smith !-- Miss Smith is a very good sort of girl ; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled .
The visit was of course short ; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being " elegantly dressed , and very pleasing ."
I have done very little ."
" Miss Woodhouse , as you will not give me your opinion , I must do as well as I can by myself ; and I have now quite determined , and really almost made up my mind -- to refuse Mr . Martin .
The listeners were amused ; and Mrs . Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning .
Woodhouse ?-- I am so glad to hear such a good account .
I know what you mean -- but Emma ' s hand is the strongest ."
Find some body for me .
Such a friend as Mrs . Weston was out of the question .
But if , which I rather imagine , your making the match , as you call it , means only your planning it , your saying to yourself one idle day , ` I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr . Weston were to marry her ,' and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ?
Emma wondered on what , of all the medley , she would fix .
" I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple ."
" _My_ report from Mrs . Goddard ' s ," said she presently , " was not so pleasant as I had hoped --` Not better ' was _my_ answer ."
He was invited on good faith .
Mrs . Elton turned to Mrs . Weston .
In Frank ' s last letter she complained , he said , of being too weak to get into her conservatory without having both his arm and his uncle ' s !
He told me every thing ; his circumstances and plans , and what they all proposed doing in the event of his marriage .
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
Jane actually on the point of going as governess !
" Good Heaven !"
One takes up a notion , and runs away with it .
-- Bad enough as it is , for I absolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree .-- I believe I have not played a bar this fortnight .-- However , he is coming , I assure you : yes , indeed , on purpose to wait on you all ."
You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles , I am sure , sir ; friendly , good sort of people as ever lived , and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years ."
She could not bear to see him suffering , to know him fancying himself neglected ; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance of both the Mr . Knightleys , that when once the event were over , his distress would be soon over too , she hesitated -- she could not proceed .
He seems perfectly unprepared for that ."
It was much easier to chat than to study ; much pleasanter to let her imagination range and work at Harriet ' s fortune , than to be labouring to enlarge her comprehension or exercise it on sober facts ; and the only literary pursuit which engaged Harriet at present , the only mental provision she was making for the evening of life , was the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort that she could meet with , into a thin quarto of hot - pressed paper , made up by her friend , and ornamented with ciphers and trophies .
The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected .-- Very extraordinary !-- And nobody knew at all which way he was gone .
Elton !"
" So prettily done !
As soon as Mrs . Weston was sufficiently recovered to admit Mr . Woodhouse ' s visits , Emma having it in view that her gentle reasonings should be employed in the cause , resolved first to announce it at home , and then at Randalls .-- But how to break it to her father at last !-- She had bound herself to do it , in such an hour of Mr . Knightley ' s absence , or when it came to the point her heart would have failed her , and she must have put it off ; but Mr . Knightley was to come at such a time , and follow up the beginning she was to make .-- She was forced to speak , and to speak cheerfully too .
Still , however , though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be leading them forward to the great event .
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their side to make him slight his father .
you will never guess .
A man who felt rightly would say at once , simply and resolutely , to Mrs . Churchill -- ` Every sacrifice of mere pleasure you will always find me ready to make to your convenience ; but I must go and see my father immediately .
" I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr . Frank Churchill has written to Mrs . Weston ?
Mr . Perry might have reason to regret the alteration , but nobody else could ."
united , ( _courtship_ , you know ,) what reverse we have !
I could not bear the idea of it ; so , as soon as Mr . Weston came into the room , and I could get at him , I spoke to him about the carriage .
I do not know a more luxurious state , sir , than sitting at one ' s ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such young women ; sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation .
But I would not wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present ."
" Do you ?-- I have no doubt .
" If I did not know her to be happy now ," said Emma , seriously , " which , in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience , she must be , I could not bear these thanks ;-- for , oh !
Short of that , it is all guess and luck -- and will generally be ill - luck .
that is quite -- I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting .
He was soon pretty well resigned .
You have hit upon the very thing to please me ."
Any thing else I should be most happy to do , at your command -- but my dancing days are over ."
The name makes me think of poor Isabella ; for she was very near being christened Catherine after her grandmama .
Many circumstances assisted the temptation .
" Oh !
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances , she did , after a little reflection , venture the following question .
She felt herself a most fortunate woman ; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought , where the only regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled , and who could ill bear to part with her .
" A very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
for I think you have a little cold , and Patty has been washing the kitchen .'--` Oh !
I believe he is one of the very best - tempered men that ever existed .
" I have reason to think ," he replied , " that Harriet Smith will soon have an offer of marriage , and from a most unexceptionable quarter :-- Robert Martin is the man .
He appeared to have a very open temper -- certainly a very cheerful and lively one ; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions , a great deal decidedly right ; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard , was fond of talking of him -- said he would be the best man in the world if he were left to himself ; and though there was no being attached to the aunt , he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude , and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect .
This would be a trial .
I long to make apologies , excuses , to urge something for myself .
" He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two ," interrupted she , with a sort of serious smile --" much less , perhaps , than he is aware of , if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on the subject ."
How was she to bear the change ?-- It was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them ; but Emma was aware that great must be the difference between a Mrs . Weston , only half a mile from them , and a Miss Taylor in the house ; and with all her advantages , natural and domestic , she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude .
" Thank you for rousing me ," he replied .
CHAPTER XV
Mr . Weston must be between forty and fifty ."
But I hope , Miss Woodhouse , that supposing -- that if -- strange as it may appear --.
It was quite a chance , he said , that he had not gone round by Randalls .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
" You are ungrateful ."
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to - morrow .
She gave him credit for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze again without offence ; but was really obliged to put an end to it , and request him to place himself elsewhere .
If we were obliged to go out such an evening as this , by any call of duty or business , what a hardship we should deem it ;-- and here are we , probably with rather thinner clothing than usual , setting forward voluntarily , without excuse , in defiance of the voice of nature , which tells man , in every thing given to his view or his feelings , to stay at home himself , and keep all under shelter that he can ;-- here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another man ' s house , with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and heard yesterday , and may not be said and heard again to - morrow .
Miss Harriet Smith may not find offers of marriage flow in so fast , though she is a very pretty girl .
Her height was pretty , just such as almost every body would think tall , and nobody could think very tall ; her figure particularly graceful ; her size a most becoming medium , between fat and thin , though a slight appearance of ill - health seemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two .
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
She spoke as she felt , with earnest regret and solicitude -- sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on , might be as much for Miss Fairfax ' s advantage and comfort as possible .
The extreme sweetness of her temper must hurt his .
He must do it all himself .
Do you really think it a bad thing ?-- why so ?"
" I must not hope to be ever situated as you are , in the midst of every dearest connexion , and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing older should make me indifferent about letters ."
