" Exactly so -- The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth -- I have not a doubt of your success .
Mr . Elton and I are very good friends , and nothing more ;" and she walked on , amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances , of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into ; and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant , and in want of counsel .
Later in the morning , and just as the girls were going to separate in preparation for the regular four o ' clock dinner , the hero of this inimitable charade walked in again .
My dear Emma , we must consider this .
Oh !
He told her the news .
What are you proud of ?
so considerate !-- But however , she is so far from well , that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better come home , and try an air that always agrees with her ; and they have no doubt that three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her -- and it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here , than go to Ireland , if she is unwell .
I have often known it done myself ."
Emma knew it to have been very much the case .
" My first enjoyment ," replied John Knightley , as they passed through the sweep - gate , " will be to find myself safe at Hartfield again ."
" Oh !
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
" I went only to the post - office ," said she , " and reached home before the rain was much .
She often says , when the letter is first opened , ` Well , Hetty , now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker - work '-- don ' t you , ma ' am ?-- And then I tell her , I am sure she would contrive to make it out herself , if she had nobody to do it for her -- every word of it -- I am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word .
Emma saw how Mr . Weston understood these joyous prospects .
" Yes ," replied Harriet modestly , but not fearfully --" I must say that I have ."
Something of a very unpleasant nature , I find , has occurred ;-- do let me know directly what it is .
That ' s a consideration indeed .-- But John , as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham , of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows , I cannot conceive any difficulty .
CHAPTER XIX
poor Miss Taylor !
You like Mr . Elton , papa ,-- I must look about for a wife for him .
" You had better order the carriage directly , my love ," said she ; " I dare say we shall be able to get along , if we set off directly ; and if we do come to any thing very bad , I can get out and walk .
" This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements , sir .
There is great fear , great caution , great resolution somewhere .-- She is _not_ to be with the _Dixons_ .
this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of their lives , as my father informs me .
" That may be , and I may have seen him fifty times , but without having any idea of his name .
How is Mr .
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty , and she would have felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement .-- But I had no choice .
His son , too well bred to hear the hint , rose immediately also , saying ,
after the note I sent him this morning , and the message he returned , that he should certainly be at home till one ."
I planned the match from that hour ; and when such success has blessed me in this instance , dear papa , you cannot think that I shall leave off match - making ."
Emma was silenced .
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
it shews what a sad invalid I am !
It is a most uncommon complexion , with her dark eye - lashes and hair -- a most distinguishing complexion !
It was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
Dixon .-- Very well .
They were called on to share in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses , and obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others ; but when the table was again safely covered , when every corner dish was placed exactly right , and occupation and ease were generally restored , Emma said ,
no ; Perry shall have all the credit ."
You might not see one in a hundred with _gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr . Knightley .
Another room of much better size might be secured for the purpose ; but it was at the other end of the house , and a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it .
You should not have done it , indeed you should not .
To amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for -- and Emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could very well describe .
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
" Yes , I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him ."
He is generally thought a fine young man , but do not expect a prodigy .
The child of good fortune !
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
She could not speak .
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
" Oh no ;-- and it is but a short letter too ."
" No , indeed , I shall grant you nothing .
He thought we walked towards Randalls most days .
Mrs . Elton seemed most favourably impressed by the size of the room , the entrance , and all that she could see or imagine .
Emma saw how Mr . Weston understood these joyous prospects .
" Did he appear a sensible young man ; a young man of information ?"
I am sure they will bring him soon ."
Mr . Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight - and - thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella ' s husband .
I could have wished , however , as you know , that you had seen Mr . Wingfield before you left home ."
In this state of schemes , and hopes , and connivance , June opened upon Hartfield .
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she felt too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely kept at a distance ; but by the others , the subject was almost immediately introduced , and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations were received , the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of " my excellent friend Colonel Campbell ."
.
With great indignation did he continue to observe him ; with great alarm and distrust , to observe also his two blinded companions .
good I am sure .-- I see it in your countenance .
It may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood .
Actually to discover that Mr . Knightley is a gentleman !
A very gracious invitation was returned , and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion .
Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
The present crisis , indeed , seemed to be brought on by them ; and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct ."
Now I cannot say , that I think you are any of you looking well at present ."
Emma continued ,
If I could be sure of the rooms being thoroughly aired -- but is Mrs . Stokes to be trusted ?
" Indeed , I am very sorry to be right in this instance .
You look as if you would not do such a thing again ."
Acquit me here , and procure for me , when it is allowable , the acquittal and good wishes of that said Emma Woodhouse , whom I regard with so much brotherly affection , as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as myself .-- Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight , you have now a key to .
This letter must make its way to Emma ' s feelings .
" She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is too cold for her .
Mrs . Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her companion , pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been , and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject .
The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr . Knightley and Robert Martin was , at this moment , so strong to Emma ' s feelings , and so strong was the recollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet ' s side , so fresh the sound of those words , spoken with such emphasis , " No , I hope I know better than to think of Robert Martin ," that she was really expecting the intelligence to prove , in some measure , premature .
Well , pretty good news , is not it ?
I did it because I thought it would offend you ; but , as you made no objection , I never did it again ."
It is such a pretty charade , my dear , that I can easily guess what fairy brought it .-- Nobody could have written so prettily , but you , Emma ."
Three months , she says so , positively , as I am going to have the pleasure of reading to you .
It is very plain that he considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side , but that he is not without hope of my growing , in time , as worthy of your affection , as you think me already .
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr . Martin .
We never were so long without seeing her before , and as I was telling Mrs . Cole , we shall hardly know how to make enough of her now ."
` Oh !'
See the consequence of keeping you company !-- What do you say to it ?"
You think you carry it off very well , I dare say , but with you it is a sort of bravado , an air of affected unconcern ; I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances .
" What can it be , Miss Woodhouse ?-- what can it be ?
I can imagine , that before she had seen any body superior , she might tolerate him .
I never had much opinion of the sea air ."
Such another scheme , composed of so many ill - assorted people , she hoped never to be betrayed into again .
" _You_ probably have been less surprized than any of us , for you have had your suspicions .-- I have not forgotten that you once tried to give me a caution .-- I wish I had attended to it -- but --( with a sinking voice and a heavy sigh ) I seem to have been doomed to blindness ."
do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax ' s sensations from you , or from any body else .
What are Harriet Smith ' s claims , either of birth , nature or education , to any connexion higher than Robert Martin ?
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs . Goddard ' s hands to shift as she can ;-- to move , in short , in Mrs . Goddard ' s line , to have Mrs . Goddard ' s acquaintance .
It was by no means her object to have it believed that her sister was _not_ a fine lady ; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it ;-- and she was considering in what way she had best retract , when Mr . Weston went on .
