I saw the word , and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to the one , and so very distressing to the other ."
" Why , really , dear Emma , I say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of _not_ being in love with her , that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last .
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield .
Mrs . and Miss Bates occupied the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - sized apartment , which was every thing to them , the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady , who with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner , wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse , and her more active , talking daughter , almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness , thanks for their visit , solicitude for their shoes , anxious inquiries after Mr . Woodhouse ' s health , cheerful communications about her mother ' s , and sweet - cake from the beaufet --" Mrs . Cole had just been there , just called in for ten minutes , and had been so good as to sit an hour with them , and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much ; and , therefore , she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too ."
May was better for every thing than February .
To him who has , it might not be so easy to burst forth at once into perfect independence , and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard at nought .
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
" Mrs . Dixon !
" I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple ."
Perry !-- such attention to Jane !"
" I know nothing of the large parties of London , sir -- I never dine with any body ."
This will be complete enjoyment ; and I do not know , Mrs . Elton , whether the uncertainty of our meetings , the sort of constant expectation there will be of his coming in to - day or to - morrow , and at any hour , may not be more friendly to happiness than having him actually in the house .
At Christmas every body invites their friends about them , and people think little of even the worst weather .
" Ever since the day -- about four years ago -- that Miss Taylor and I met with him in Broadway Lane , when , because it began to drizzle , he darted away with so much gallantry , and borrowed two umbrellas for us from Farmer Mitchell ' s , I made up my mind on the subject .
He had made his fortune , bought his house , and obtained his wife ; and was beginning a new period of existence , with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through .
" This is an alliance which , whoever -- whatever your friends may be , must be agreeable to them , provided at least they have common sense ; and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools .
" Colonel and Mrs . Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer ," said Jane .
there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr . Knightley .
really , never !-- Bless me !
Mrs . Weston begs you to put on your tippet .
" My dear Miss Woodhouse ," said the latter , " I am just run across to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a little while , and give us your opinion of our new instrument ; you and Miss Smith .
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
Sighs and fine words had been given in abundance ; but she could hardly devise any set of expressions , or fancy any tone of voice , less allied with real love .
He had been going to call on them .
He has not such a fine air and way of walking as Mr . Knightley .
They will stay a good while when they do come , and he will be half his time with us .
cried she playfully .
" To fall in with each other on such an errand as this ," thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side .
Dear Miss Woodhouse , how could you so mistake me ?"
" Yes ; my father is to join me here : we shall walk back together , and I must be off immediately .
Emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ; and after a moment ' s debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , replied ,
` You _must_ _all_ spend your evening with us ,' said she --` I positively must have you _all_ come .'"
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it ."
" Well , Miss Woodhouse ," he almost immediately began , " your inclination for dancing has not been quite frightened away , I hope , by the terrors of my father ' s little rooms .
When Mr . Cole had moved away , and her attention could be restored as before , she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax , who was sitting exactly opposite .
Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the last two weeks -- indescribable spirit ; the idea , the expectation of seeing him which every morning had brought , the assurance of his attentions , his liveliness , his manners !
" Leave out the two last lines , and there is no reason why you should not write it into your book ."
" I wonder what they are all doing -- whether his sisters know -- if he is unhappy , they will be unhappy too .
The rest of the day , the following night , were hardly enough for her thoughts .-- She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours .
The charming Augusta Hawkins , in addition to all the usual advantages of perfect beauty and merit , was in possession of an independent fortune , of so many thousands as would always be called ten ; a point of some dignity , as well as some convenience : the story told well ; he had not thrown himself away -- he had gained a woman of 10 , 000 l . or thereabouts ; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity -- the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice ; the history which he had to give Mrs . Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious -- the steps so quick , from the accidental rencontre , to the dinner at Mr . Green ' s , and the party at Mrs . Brown ' s -- smiles and blushes rising in importance -- with consciousness and agitation richly scattered -- the lady had been so easily impressed -- so sweetly disposed -- had in short , to use a most intelligible phrase , been so very ready to have him , that vanity and prudence were equally contented .
" Well ," said Emma , " there is no disputing about taste .-- At least you admire her except her complexion ."
" Yes ," he replied , " any body may know how highly I think of her ."
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr . Knightley .
Pray do not make any more matches ."
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter .
It made him so very unhappy , indeed , that it could not be persevered in .
Every body who saw it was pleased , but Mr . Elton was in continual raptures , and defended it through every criticism .
I leave you to your own reflections ."
He stopt again , rose again , and seemed quite embarrassed .-- He was more in love with her than Emma had supposed ; and who can say how it might have ended , if his father had not made his appearance ?
" Indeed !-- that must be a very great pleasure ."
After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress and look , compliments very quietly and properly taken , Mrs . Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself -- and it was , " How do you like my gown ?-- How do you like my trimming ?-- How has Wright done my hair ?"
" Emma knows I never flatter her ," said Mr . Knightley , " but I meant no reflection on any body .
Every thing so good !"
" Ah !
My mother is delightfully well ; and Jane caught no cold last night .
at three - and - twenty to be the king of his company -- the great man -- the practised politician , who is to read every body ' s character , and make every body ' s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority ; to be dispensing his flatteries around , that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself !
VOLUME II
You will puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty , and of what she has a claim to , that , in a little while , nobody within her reach will be good enough for her .
Many vain solicitudes would be prevented -- many awkwardnesses smoothed by it .
Miss Woodhouse , how ungrateful I have been !"
Emma was pleased with the thought ; and producing the box , the table was quickly scattered over with alphabets , which no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves .
As to men and women , our opinions are sometimes very different ; but with regard to these children , I observe we never disagree ."
Harriet , who was standing at some distance , and with face turned from her , did not immediately say any thing ; and when she did speak , it was in a voice nearly as agitated as Emma ' s .
All the minor arrangements of table and chair , lights and music , tea and supper , made themselves ; or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs . Weston and Mrs .
Emma felt the bad taste of her friend , but let it pass with a " very true ; and it would be a small consolation to her , for the clownish manner which might be offending her every hour of the day , to know that her husband could write a good letter ."
This is saying very plainly --` Pray , Miss Smith , give me leave to pay my addresses to you .
By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment .
He had been going to call on them .
" I would rather be talking to you ," he replied ; " but as it seems a matter of justice , it shall be done ."
He has a great regard for the Bateses , you know , independent of Jane Fairfax -- and is always glad to shew them attention .
It was by no means his daughter ' s wish that the intellects of Highbury in general should be put under requisition .
For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
I shall have many fellow - mourners for the ball , if not for Frank Churchill ; but Mr . Knightley will be happy .
In what respect ?
She could not be alone without feeling the full weight of their separate claims ; and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost , was the question .
To those who had no resources it was a different thing ; but my resources made me quite independent .
He has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart ."
William did not seem to mind it himself , he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many ; for William , you know , thinks more of his master ' s profit than any thing ; but Mrs . Hodges , he said , was quite displeased at their being all sent away .
to which his prompt reply was , " Most readily , Mrs . Weston , if you will dance with me ."
If I meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore , consider that point as settled ."
" What do you say to Mrs .
It was settled so , upon the hill , while we were walking about with Mr . Knightley .
" Why , really , dear Emma , I say that he is so very much occupied by the idea of _not_ being in love with her , that I should not wonder if it were to end in his being so at last .
Only half an hour before her friend called for her at Mrs . Goddard ' s , her evil stars had led her to the very spot where , at that moment , a trunk , directed to _The_ _Rev . _ _Philip_ _Elton_ , _White - Hart_ , _Bath_ , was to be seen under the operation of being lifted into the butcher ' s cart , which was to convey it to where the coaches past ; and every thing in this world , excepting that trunk and the direction , was consequently a blank .
Her voice was not unsteady ; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a development of self , such a burst of threatening evil , such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions , must create .-- She listened with much inward suffering , but with great outward patience , to Harriet ' s detail .-- Methodical , or well arranged , or very well delivered , it could not be expected to be ; but it contained , when separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink her spirit -- especially with the corroborating circumstances , which her own memory brought in favour of Mr . Knightley ' s most improved opinion of Harriet .
Miss Smith , pray take care .
Excepting inequality of fortune , and perhaps a little disparity of age , I can see nothing unsuitable ."
How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her !"
I do not pretend to it .
They were now approaching the cottage , and all idle topics were superseded .
There she was welcomed , with the utmost delight , by her father , who had been trembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage Lane -- turning a corner which he could never bear to think of -- and in strange hands -- a mere common coachman -- no James ; and there it seemed as if her return only were wanted to make every thing go well : for Mr . John Knightley , ashamed of his ill - humour , was now all kindness and attention ; and so particularly solicitous for the comfort of her father , as to seem -- if not quite ready to join him in a basin of gruel -- perfectly sensible of its being exceedingly wholesome ; and the day was concluding in peace and comfort to all their little party , except herself .-- But her mind had never been in such perturbation ; and it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive and cheerful till the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quiet reflection .
Gone to Mr . Woodhouse ' s .
" Cautious , very cautious ," thought Emma ; " he advances inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure ."
He wanted her to look up and smile ; and having now brought herself not to smile too broadly -- she did -- cheerfully answering ,
Whenever you are transplanted , like me , Miss Woodhouse , you will understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind .
I am very sure you did me good .
Oh !
" You have some news to hear , now you are come back , that will rather surprize you ."
Jane Fairfax did look and move superior ; but Emma suspected she might have been glad to change feelings with Harriet , very glad to have purchased the mortification of having loved -- yes , of having loved even Mr . Elton in vain -- by the surrender of all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend .
