Living constantly with right - minded and well - informed people , her heart and understanding had received every advantage of discipline and culture ; and Colonel Campbell ' s residence being in London , every lighter talent had been done full justice to , by the attendance of first - rate masters .
" Myself creating what I saw ,"
But what can be the matter ?-- Is she really not ill ?"
yes , perfectly .-- Why do you make a doubt of it ?"
said she , with a conscious look .
He came down by yesterday ' s coach , and was with me this morning immediately after breakfast , to report his proceedings , first on my affairs , and then on his own .
The worn - out past was sunk in the freshness of what was coming ; and in the rapidity of half a moment ' s thought , she hoped Mr . Elton would now be talked of no more .
Approve my charade and my intentions in the same glance .'
he cried , " I wish your father might be half as easily convinced as John will be , of our having every right that equal worth can give , to be happy together .
yes , perfectly .-- Why do you make a doubt of it ?"
Mr . Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit , that in spite of the increasing coldness , he seemed to have no idea of shrinking from it , and set forward at last most punctually with his eldest daughter in his own carriage , with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either of the others ; too full of the wonder of his own going , and the pleasure it was to afford at Randalls to see that it was cold , and too well wrapt up to feel it .
Good Mrs . Stokes would not know her own room again .
You and Mr . Elton are by situation called together ; you belong to one another by every circumstance of your respective homes .
Emma was delighted , and only wanted him to go on in the same style ; but his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane , and his next words were ,
" My poor dear Harriet !
There was no resisting such news , no possibility of avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr . Weston ' s , confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of his wife , fewer and quieter , but not less to the purpose .
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
What say you both to our collecting the same party , and exploring to Box Hill again , while the fine weather lasts ?-- It must be the same party , you know , quite the same party , not _one_ exception ."
" And , upon my word , they have an air of great probability .
Poor old John , I have a great regard for him ; he was clerk to my poor father twenty - seven years ; and now , poor old man , he is bed - ridden , and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints -- I must go and see him to - day ; and so will Jane , I am sure , if she gets out at all .
He found he could not be useful , and his feelings were too much irritated for talking .
Dixon in them ."
` How could he contrive to come ?
Do you think I am right ?"
She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality .-- How shocked had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates !
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
Oh !
" Oh !
Miniatures , half - lengths , whole - lengths , pencil , crayon , and water - colours had been all tried in turn .
" Never , never !"
She would sit whenever I asked her .
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face ; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs . Bates , and appearing to attend to the good old lady ' s replies , she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax , and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side , saying , with significant nods ,
" How sorry I am !
-- He met her at the parlour - door , and hardly asking her how she did , in the natural key of his voice , sunk it immediately , to say , unheard by her father ,
This lesson , she very much feared , they would receive only from herself ; she had little hope of Mr . Knightley , none of Mr . Weston .
" What is to be done , my dear Emma ?-- what is to be done ?"
Mr . Woodhouse soon followed ; and the necessity of exertion made him composed .
Don ' t scruple .
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself .
[ To Mrs .
their luxury and ease .
" Can you trust me with such flatterers ?-- Does my vain spirit ever tell me I am wrong ?"
He had long made up his mind to Jane Fairfax ' s going out as governess , and could talk of it cheerfully , but Mr . Knightley ' s going to London had been an unexpected blow .
Wickedness is always wickedness , but folly is not always folly .-- It depends upon the character of those who handle it .
Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed , without reproaches , or apparent sense of ill - usage ; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of resentment , a something bordering on it in her style , which increased the desirableness of their being separate .-- It might be only her own consciousness ; but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke .
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs . Elton ' s thoughts , and understand why she was , like herself , in happy spirits ; it was being in Miss Fairfax ' s confidence , and fancying herself acquainted with what was still a secret to other people .
I shall certainly be at leisure ."
The " How d ' ye do ' s " were quiet and constrained on each side .
Emma could not doubt .
He came to the part of the room where the sitters - by were collected , spoke to some , and walked about in front of them , as if to shew his liberty , and his resolution of maintaining it .
You will see her to advantage ; see her and hear her -- no , I am afraid you will not hear her at all , for she has an aunt who never holds her tongue ."
Harriet smiled again , and her smiles grew stronger .
He understood what would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else .
always my kindest friend on every occasion .
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to - morrow .
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
They all united ; and , on reaching Hartfield gates , Emma , who knew it was exactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father , pressed them all to go in and drink tea with him .
" Another thing must be taken into consideration too -- Mrs . Elton does not talk _to_ Miss Fairfax as she speaks _of_ her .
A poet in love must be encouraged in both capacities , or neither .
Wrapt up in a cloak of politeness , she seemed determined to hazard nothing .
Her face was averted from those who had made the attack , and turned towards her aunt .
Had she left her where she ought , and where he had told her she ought !-- Had she not , with a folly which no tongue could express , prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong -- all would have been safe ; none of this dreadful sequel would have been .
So much superadded decision of character !
Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it produced : as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls , she closed with the offer of that officious Mrs . Elton ; the whole system of whose treatment of her , by the bye , has ever filled me with indignation and hatred .
" What a very great pleasure it will be to you !
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin , it is impossible ; she has refused him , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application .
Ours are all apple - tarts .
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , it is very delightful to me , to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove .
He had no reason to wish his hair longer , to conceal any confusion of face ; no reason to wish the money unspent , to improve his spirits .
Emma found it really time to be at home ; the visit had already lasted long ; and on examining watches , so much of the morning was perceived to be gone , that Mrs . Weston and her companion taking leave also , could allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield gates , before they set off for Randalls .
" But you may come again in the cool of to - morrow morning ."
She cast her eye over it , pondered , caught the meaning , read it through again to be quite certain , and quite mistress of the lines , and then passing it to Harriet , sat happily smiling , and saying to herself , while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness , " Very well , Mr . Elton , very well indeed .
Mr . John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure , but said only , coolly ,
The expense shall not be thought of ; and though he is so liberal , and so fond of Jane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance , we could not suffer it to be so , you know .
A little curiosity Emma had ; and she made the most of it while her friend related .
It confesses that you have long understood me ."
" Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would ."
" I went only to the post - office ," said she , " and reached home before the rain was much .
It is always the lady ' s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance .
That is a great thing .
We never see any thing of it on our club - nights ."
It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball , which she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy .-- She was extremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the Eltons , and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike ; and his praise of Harriet , his concession in her favour , was peculiarly gratifying .
One would fancy we were bosom friends !
Excepting inequality of fortune , and perhaps a little disparity of age , I can see nothing unsuitable ."
It will be the only difference ."
_There_ , indeed , lay real pleasure , for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty - four to his comfort ; and feeling that , unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection and confiding esteem , she could not , in her general conduct , be open to any severe reproach .
" She meant to be impertinently curious , just as such an Anne Cox should be ."
She has not the least idea ."
But when satisfied on all these points , and their acquaintance proportionably advanced , he contrived to find an opportunity , while their two fathers were engaged with each other , of introducing his mother - in - law , and speaking of her with so much handsome praise , so much warm admiration , so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to his father , and her very kind reception of himself , as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please -- and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her .
" My poor dear Harriet !
-- Here was a sly glance at Emma .
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr . Weston depended , and felt , that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had so many intimates and confidantes , was not the very first distinction in the scale of vanity .
Plain dealing was always best .
I cannot bear to imagine any reluctance on his side ; but I am sure there is a great wish on the Churchills ' to keep him to themselves .
She could not endure to give him the true explanation ; for though her suspicions were by no means removed , she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them .
Fortune I do not want ; employment I do not want ; consequence I do not want : I believe few married women are half as much mistress of their husband ' s house as I am of Hartfield ; and never , never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important ; so always first and always right in any man ' s eyes as I am in my father ' s ."
Emma Woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty - one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
Were she a woman of fortune , I would leave every harmless absurdity to take its chance , I would not quarrel with you for any liberties of manner .
Beyond it she would on no account proceed .
