A year and a half is the very utmost that they can have lived at West Hall ; and how they got their fortune nobody knows .
By doing it , I shall feel that I am near you .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
" Oh !
Mr . Martin , I imagine , has his fortune entirely to make -- cannot be at all beforehand with the world .
And , after proceeding a few steps , she added -- " I stopped you ungraciously , just now , Mr . Knightley , and , I am afraid , gave you pain .-- But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend , or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation -- as a friend , indeed , you may command me .-- I will hear whatever you like .
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
He is a most charming young man .
And so does poor Mrs . Weston "-- with half a sigh and half a smile at her .
" My dear papa , he is three - and - twenty .
If he had never esteemed my opinion before , he would have thought highly of me then ; and , I dare say , left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man ever had .
" I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls ."
" Oh !
" Yes , they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London .
" I hope Mrs . Bates and Miss Fairfax are --"
I assured him that I could not .
That is a great thing .
She is always so attentive to them !"
" Yes , he has been gone just four weeks , as you observe , Miss Woodhouse ," said Miss Bates , " four weeks yesterday .-- A Miss Hawkins !-- Well , I had always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts ; not that I ever -- Mrs . Cole once whispered to me -- but I immediately said , ` No , Mr . Elton is a most worthy young man -- but '-- In short , I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries .
" It is impossible that Emma should not miss such a companion ," said Mr . Knightley .
" You are ungrateful ."
I had no intention , I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes , when I first entered the house .
Upon my word , Jane on one arm , and me on the other !-- Stop , stop , let us stand a little back , Mrs . Elton is going ; dear Mrs . Elton , how elegant she looks !-- Beautiful lace !-- Now we all follow in her train .
Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement , and seemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months before him of such near neighbourhood to many dear friends -- for the house was taken for May and June .
" I do not say it is so ; but you will do well to consider whether it is so or not , and to regulate your behaviour accordingly .
" Ah !
" I am afraid we must be running away ," said Emma , glancing at Harriet , and beginning to rise --" My father will be expecting us .
It did not often happen ; for Mr . John Knightley had really a great regard for his father - in - law , and generally a strong sense of what was due to him ; but it was too often for Emma ' s charity , especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endured , though the offence came not .
Pray excuse me ; but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy , it cannot be expected that Emma , accountable to nobody but her father , who perfectly approves the acquaintance , should put an end to it , so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself .
" No -- Mrs . Knightley ;-- and till she is in being , I will manage such matters myself ."
Most cordially , when Miss Bates arrived , did she agree that it must .
You will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury ; and as _you_ were the person slighted , you will forgive me instantly ; but I must work on my father ' s compassion , by reminding him , that so long as I absented myself from his house , so long I lost the blessing of knowing you .
" Nonsensical girl !"
There was consciousness , animation , and warmth ; there was every thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted .-- She came forward with an offered hand ; and said , in a low , but very feeling tone ,
" True , sir ; and Emma , because she had Miss Fairfax ."
He agreed to it , but with so quiet a " Yes ," as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it .
Mrs . and Miss Bates occupied the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - sized apartment , which was every thing to them , the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady , who with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner , wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse , and her more active , talking daughter , almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness , thanks for their visit , solicitude for their shoes , anxious inquiries after Mr . Woodhouse ' s health , cheerful communications about her mother ' s , and sweet - cake from the beaufet --" Mrs . Cole had just been there , just called in for ten minutes , and had been so good as to sit an hour with them , and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much ; and , therefore , she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too ."
" I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him ."
William Larkins let me keep a larger quantity than usual this year .
" Yes ," he replied , and without the smallest apparent embarrassment .-- " But they would have done better had they given her notice of it .
" To fall in with each other on such an errand as this ," thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side .
I am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty , and such temper , the highest claims a woman could possess ."
We shall only be making each other more angry .
She was now met by Mrs .
I had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith .
CHAPTER II
" And while Mrs . Weston pays her visit , I may be allowed , I hope ," said Frank Churchill , " to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield -- if you are going home ."
But Mr . Weston is almost an old man .
Oh !
" Oh !
That will be very bad ."
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
" Yes , here I am , my good friend ; and here I have been so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth is , that I am waiting for my lord and master .
" You have made her too tall , Emma ," said Mr . Knightley .
A large party secures its own amusement .
Such talent as hers must not be suffered to remain unknown .-- I dare say you have heard those charming lines of the poet ,
Two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over - throw of every thing .
This would not do ; she immediately stopped , under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing of her half - boot , and stooping down in complete occupation of the footpath , begged them to have the goodness to walk on , and she would follow in half a minute .
" I had a few lines on parish business from Mr . Weston this morning , and at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened ."
" That ' s true ," she cried --" very true .
It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell ; but she really did not seem to feel it ."
" Harriet , I will only venture to declare , that Mr . Knightley is the last man in the world , who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does ."
The first remote sound to which she felt herself obliged to attend , was the name of Jane Fairfax .
Mrs . Weston sees no objection to it , provided you are satisfied .
Do not you see that , at this instant , the very passage of her own letter , which sent me the report , is passing under her eye -- that the whole blunder is spread before her -- that she can attend to nothing else , though pretending to listen to the others ?"
such an aunt !"
" Oh !
" Aye , very true .-- I wish I could recollect more of it .
They called for him in their way ; were all extremely amused ; and my brother asked him to dine with them the next day -- which he did -- and in the course of that visit ( as I understand ) he found an opportunity of speaking to Harriet ; and certainly did not speak in vain .-- She made him , by her acceptance , as happy even as he is deserving .
" That Mr . Elton should really be in love with me ,-- me , of all people , who did not know him , to speak to him , at Michaelmas !
It seemed the best scheme ; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
CHAPTER XV
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself , by representing that though he certainly would make them nine , yet he always said so little , that the increase of noise would be very immaterial .
From our relative situation , those attentions were her due , and were felt to be so .-- Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand me before the expiration of that fortnight , I cannot say ;-- when I called to take leave of her , I remember that I was within a moment of confessing the truth , and I then fancied she was not without suspicion ; but I have no doubt of her having since detected me , at least in some degree .-- She may not have surmised the whole , but her quickness must have penetrated a part .
There was a little blush , and then this answer ,
" This man is almost too gallant to be in love ," thought Emma .
" I am sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , excepting those little nervous head - aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free from anywhere , I am quite well myself ; and if the children were rather pale before they went to bed , it was only because they were a little more tired than usual , from their journey and the happiness of coming .
But , upon my word , Mr . Elton , in your case , I should certainly excuse myself .
Upon my word , Jane on one arm , and me on the other !-- Stop , stop , let us stand a little back , Mrs . Elton is going ; dear Mrs . Elton , how elegant she looks !-- Beautiful lace !-- Now we all follow in her train .
She had long resolved that one - and - twenty should be the period .
and I can account for it only in one way ; you are not yourself , or you could not speak either to me , or of Harriet , in such a manner .
The aunt was a capricious woman , and governed her husband entirely ; but it was not in Mr . Weston ' s nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear , and , as he believed , so deservedly dear .
He shook his head ; but there was a smile of indulgence with it , and he only said ,
But what is the meaning of this ?
He came four times a day for a week .
But yet I think there was something wanting .
But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in -- observing , as she proposed it to Harriet , that , as well as she could calculate , they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax .
" The shame ," he answered , " is all mine , or ought to be .
Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons to please ; she will now have but one .
" Me !"
You shall have a charming wife ."
My Emma , does not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other ?"
They are to be new set .
" Thank you , but I would rather you did not mention the subject to her ; till the time draws nearer , I do not wish to be giving any body trouble ."
Mrs . Churchill will not be second to any lady in the land for "--
She would be never led into temptation , nor left for it to find her out .
" This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted , and Mr . Weston has done very well for himself ; but he must have knocked up every body else .
The post - office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
Emma sat with her as long as she could , to attend her in Mrs . Goddard ' s unavoidable absences , and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr . Elton ' s would be depressed when he knew her state ; and left her at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit , and of their all missing her very much .
