" I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind ; but excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if I take the liberty ( I consider myself , you know , as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma ' s mother might have had ) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good can arise from Harriet Smith ' s intimacy being made a matter of much discussion among you .
She was quite concerned and ashamed , and resolved to do such things no more .
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
I hope you will think better of their looks to - morrow ; for I assure you Mr . Wingfield told me , that he did not believe he had ever sent us off altogether , in such good case .
I will call another day , and hear the pianoforte ."
" Oh !
CHAPTER IX
The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet ' s mind was not to be talked away .
The post - office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
It was hot ; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered , dispersed way , scarcely any three together , they insensibly followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes , which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the river , seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds .-- It led to nothing ; nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars , which seemed intended , in their erection , to give the appearance of an approach to the house , which never had been there .
For some time she was amused , without thinking beyond the immediate cause ; but as she came to understand the family better , other feelings arose .
" But , Harriet , is it necessary to burn the court - plaister ?-- I have not a word to say for the bit of old pencil , but the court - plaister might be useful ."
Pain is no expiation .
But when satisfied on all these points , and their acquaintance proportionably advanced , he contrived to find an opportunity , while their two fathers were engaged with each other , of introducing his mother - in - law , and speaking of her with so much handsome praise , so much warm admiration , so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to his father , and her very kind reception of himself , as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please -- and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her .
" You are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
" Oh !
Here is my sketch of the fourth , who was a baby .
The prospect before her now , was threatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled -- that might not be even partially brightened .
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home ; and though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some society or other , it was very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being all alone in his own house , too wise to stir out ; and to hear him say to Mr . Knightley , whom no weather could keep entirely from them ,--
I absolutely cannot do without music .
After some attempts , therefore , to be permitted to begin again , they were obliged to thank Mrs . Weston , look sorrowful , and have done .
This is three times as large .-- And you have never any odd humours , my dear ."
said Emma , laughing .
" You are extremely kind ," said Jane ; " but I cannot give up my early walk .
You cannot be ignorant , Mrs . Elton , of my connexion with the family , nor of the treatment I have met with ; and , between ourselves , the whole blame of it is to be laid to her .
Mrs . Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses , in order to hear the new instrument .
Every body is asleep !"
where shall we sit ?
if you were to see what a headache she has .
The truth of this representation there was no denying .
Mr . Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight - and - thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella ' s husband .
I always say , we are quite blessed in our neighbours .-- My dear sir , if there is one thing my mother loves better than another , it is pork -- a roast loin of pork --"
We seemed to understand each other .
Understanding and gratification came together .
.
His tall , firm , upright figure , among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men , was such as Emma felt must draw every body ' s eyes ; and , excepting her own partner , there was not one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him .-- He moved a few steps nearer , and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner , with what natural grace , he must have danced , would he but take the trouble .-- Whenever she caught his eye , she forced him to smile ; but in general he was looking grave .
It is too unlikely , for me to believe it without proof ."
I congratulate you , my dear Harriet , with all my heart .
They were all disengaged and all happy .-- The preparatory interest of this dinner , however , was not yet over .
She says she is afraid there will be draughts in the passage , though every thing has been done -- One door nailed up -- Quantities of matting -- My dear Jane , indeed you must .
One cannot wonder , one cannot wonder .
you were perfectly right !
" I mentioned no _names_ , you will observe .-- Oh !
Considering how very handsome she is , she appears to be little occupied with it ; her vanity lies another way .
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
I saw you first in February ."
-- But ever since we had the history of that day , I have been so fond of Mr .
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech , the many bitter feelings , made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma ' s side , to enable her to say on reply ,
" Poor comfort !"
" I am happy you approved ," said Emma , smiling ; " but I hope I am not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield ."
And it cannot be for the value of our custom now , for what is our consumption of bread , you know ?
Knightley .-- It seemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favour , as if his eyes received the truth from her ' s , and all that had passed of good in her feelings were at once caught and honoured .-- He looked at her with a glow of regard .
I shall leave off while I am well ."
According to Miss Bates -- it all came from her -- Mrs . Dixon had written most pressingly .
A cold stormy rain set in , and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs , which the wind was despoiling , and the length of the day , which only made such cruel sights the longer visible .
His appearance is so much against him , and his manner so bad , that if she ever were disposed to favour him , she is not now .
They had sung together once or twice , it appeared , at Weymouth .
No -- till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment , it had never entered my head .
They have no mercy on her ."
" This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted , and Mr . Weston has done very well for himself ; but he must have knocked up every body else .
You will be adored in Highbury .
" Mrs . Bates , let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs .
Composure with a witness !
A Miss Hawkins -- that ' s all I know .
We hear of him for ever at some watering - place or other .
" Yes ; Jane says she is sure they will ; but yet , this is such a situation as she cannot feel herself justified in declining .
Neither Mr . Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them ; and we used sometimes to say very cutting things !
" What a comfort it is , that we think alike about our nephews and nieces .
Will not it be a good plan ?
They are very , very kind in their visits .
" You are a very warm friend to Mr . Martin ; but , as I said before , are unjust to Harriet .
Yes , Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which , because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days .
At the same time , nobody could wonder if Mr . Elton should have aspired -- Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on , so good - humouredly .
CHAPTER XVIII
She and Mrs . Weston were obliged to be almost always either talking together or silent together .
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
He will think all the happiness , all the advantage , on your side of the question ; all the merit on mine .
" Oh !
" You could not have visited me !"
A very few days brought the party from London , and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet , than she became perfectly satisfied -- unaccountable as it was !-- that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr . Knightley , and was now forming all her views of happiness .
It was a delightful visit ;-- perfect , in being much too short .
" No , indeed I do not ."
The move began ; and Miss Bates might be heard from that moment , without interruption , till her being seated at table and taking up her spoon .
" You were speaking ," said he , gravely .
I shall sit by you .
she cried .--" Well !"
Weston ."
Mr . Weston is really as kind as herself .
He loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
Vanity , extravagance , love of change , restlessness of temper , which must be doing something , good or bad ; heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs . Weston , indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general ; he became liable to all these charges .
" Poor Jane Fairfax !"
Mr . Weston was a great favourite , and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such unreserve , as to his wife ; not any one , to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and understood , of being always interesting and always intelligible , the little affairs , arrangements , perplexities , and pleasures of her father and herself .
That is what she writes about .
cried Emma ; " at that rate , what will become of her ?"
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper ' s room , or a bad butler ' s pantry , but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy , and that whenever he were attached , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment .
I must put on a few ornaments now , because it is expected of me .
But fetch them both .
Harriet turned away ; but Emma could receive him with the usual smile , and her quick eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push -- of having thrown a die ; and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up .
" I am not speaking of its prudence ; merely its probability ."
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come ?
