" I do not know what your opinion may be , Mrs . Weston ," said Mr . Knightley , " of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith , but I think it a bad thing ."
" That is to say , you chose to have your walk , for you were not six yards from your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you ; and Henry and John had seen more drops than they could count long before .
Harriet was very ready to speak of the share he had had in their moonlight walks and merry evening games ; and dwelt a good deal upon his being so very good - humoured and obliging .
you forget yourself -- you take me for my friend -- any message to Miss Smith I shall be happy to deliver ; but no more of this to _me_ , if you please ."
The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates .
The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove , " My brother Mr . Suckling ' s seat ;"-- a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove .
" Ah !
He was soon pretty well resigned .
" Mr . Knightley was there too , was he ?"
that is quite -- I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting .
you would rather talk of her person than her mind , would you ?
Upon such occasions poor Mr . Woodhouses feelings were in sad warfare .
And , in fact , you have heard all the essential already .
Mrs . Weston remained with Mr . Woodhouse .
I do not consider myself at all a fortunate person ."
Miss Nash , head - teacher at Mrs . Goddard ' s , had written out at least three hundred ; and Harriet , who had taken the first hint of it from her , hoped , with Miss Woodhouse ' s help , to get a great many more .
A better written letter , Harriet ( returning it ,) than I had expected ."
She had always wanted to do every thing , and had made more progress both in drawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as she would ever submit to .
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
Emma could not doubt .
poor Jane is ill !'
.
I congratulate you , my dear Harriet , with all my heart .
Well , Frank , your dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent .
And the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors , the more I shall like you ."
And I hate Italian singing .-- There is no understanding a word of it .
What are Harriet Smith ' s claims , either of birth , nature or education , to any connexion higher than Robert Martin ?
` Not that it was such a very old petticoat either -- for still it would last a great while -- and , indeed , she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong .'"
" What is the matter now ?"
Did not you observe her manner of answering me ?
You must think one five hundred million times more above me than the other .
Ah !
With their wealth , their views increased ; their want of a larger house , their inclination for more company .
oh !
" Yes ," replied Harriet modestly , but not fearfully --" I must say that I have ."
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face ; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs . Bates , and appearing to attend to the good old lady ' s replies , she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax , and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side , saying , with significant nods ,
You like Mr . Elton , papa ,-- I must look about for a wife for him .
I have nothing more to shew you , or to say -- except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire , and I wish you to see me do it ."
" Very odd !
That is a great thing .
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor ' s merits , without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse ' s character , than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor ' s .
" You ought to know your friend best ," replied Mr . Knightley ; " but I should say she was a good - tempered , soft - hearted girl , not likely to be very , very determined against any young man who told her he loved her ."
He was quite as undaunted and as lively as ever ; and , after seeing him , Emma thus moralised to herself :--
But the sight of Mr . Knightley among the most attentive , soon drew away half Emma ' s mind ; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs . Weston ' s suspicions , to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions .
What right had he to come among us with affection and faith engaged , and with manners so _very_ disengaged ?
he is off .
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment .
Do not let us be too solemn on the business .
Why does not he try Bath ?-- Indeed he should .
There must be ample room in it for every real comfort .
She had brought evil on Harriet , on herself , and she too much feared , on Mr .
The error has been all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give , I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell .'"
no , I am sure you are a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise me what I had best do -- No , no , I do not mean that -- As you say , one ' s mind ought to be quite made up -- One should not be hesitating -- It is a very serious thing .-- It will be safer to say ` No ,' perhaps .-- Do you think I had better say ` No ?'"
In one respect Mrs . Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first .
" Did you ever have your likeness taken , Harriet ?"
Thank you , my mother is remarkably well .
My perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have been so much out of humour before ."
He does not think of the draught .
And so I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her civilities and consents to be with her .
He had not been at Donwell for two years .
But I want to set your heart at ease as to Mrs . S .-- _My_ representation , you see , has quite appeased her ."
What happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt , when she comes to visit them !
" Only think of our happening to meet him !-- How very odd !
She recalled her past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen years -- how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old -- how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health -- and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood .
It was Garrick ' s , you know ."
Oh !
" I do not think he is conceited either , in general ," said Harriet , her conscience opposing such censure ; " at least , he is very good natured , and I shall always feel much obliged to him , and have a great regard for -- but that is quite a different thing from -- and you know , though he may like me , it does not follow that I should -- and certainly I must confess that since my visiting here I have seen people -- and if one comes to compare them , person and manners , there is no comparison at all , _one_ is so very handsome and agreeable .
I long to make apologies , excuses , to urge something for myself .
That is _court_ .
There are secrets in all families , you know )-- The case is , that a party of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January ; and that Frank ' s coming depends upon their being put off .
This is what we all feel .
" How d ' ye do ?-- how d ' ye do ?-- We have been sitting with your father -- glad to see him so well .
One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other ."
His good - nature , his humanity , as I tell you , would be quite enough to account for the horses .
" Have you any idea of Mr . Knightley ' s returning your affection ?"
Her own conduct , as well as her own heart , was before her in the same few minutes .
May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances of this little projected ball , to be given , not at Randalls , but at the Crown Inn ?"
And , without love , I am sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as mine .
no , I am sure you are a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise me what I had best do -- No , no , I do not mean that -- As you say , one ' s mind ought to be quite made up -- One should not be hesitating -- It is a very serious thing .-- It will be safer to say ` No ,' perhaps .-- Do you think I had better say ` No ?'"
Is this fair , Mrs .
As long as Mr . Knightley remained with them , Emma ' s fever continued ; but when he was gone , she began to be a little tranquillised and subdued -- and in the course of the sleepless night , which was the tax for such an evening , she found one or two such very serious points to consider , as made her feel , that even her happiness must have some alloy .
It seems an impossibility !-- You cannot mean to say , that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin .
But ah !
Oh !
And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet ' s sake ; if he were to be thought of hereafter , as finding in Harriet ' s society all that he wanted ; if Harriet were to be the chosen , the first , the dearest , the friend , the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence ; what could be increasing Emma ' s wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind , that it had been all her own work ?
He had a great regard for Mrs . Goddard ; and Emma should write a line , and invite her .
With men he can be rational and unaffected , but when he has ladies to please , every feature works ."
asked Mrs .
Happy creature !
" About Jane Fairfax .
After waiting a moment , as if to be sure she intended to say no more , he replied ,
Elton , and Miss Hawkins !-- Good morning to you ."
How could she have been so brutal , so cruel to Miss Bates !
You will not like staying late .
" Here have I ," said she , " actually talked poor Harriet into being very much attached to this man .
Before the middle of the next day , he was at Hartfield ; and he entered the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of the scheme .
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad .
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
