There is always a look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneath them .
And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction to such vanity - baits for poor young ladies ."
Mr . and Mrs . Elton appeared ; and all the smiles and the proprieties passed .
" Well , I believe , if you will excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , I shall take Emma ' s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
Mr . Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade .
There was a communication before her , one which _she_ only could be competent to make -- the confession of her engagement to her father ; but she would have nothing to do with it at present .-- She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs . Weston were safe and well .
And so she began inquiring after her directly , saying , ` I know you cannot have heard from Jane lately , because it is not her time for writing ;' and when I immediately said , ` But indeed we have , we had a letter this very morning ,' I do not know that I ever saw any body more surprized .
I made the match , you know , four years ago ; and to have it take place , and be proved in the right , when so many people said Mr . Weston would never marry again , may comfort me for any thing ."
Her ideas only varied as to the how much .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
His manners , however , must have been unmarked , wavering , dubious , or she could not have been so misled .
" So scrupulous for others ," he continued , " and yet so careless for herself !
Have you heard the news ?
He must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing .
But between _us_ , I am convinced there never can be any likeness , except in being unmarried ."
They were stopping , however , in the first place at Mrs . Bates ' s ; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford ' s ; and had all but knocked , when Emma caught their eye .-- Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the agreeableness of yesterday ' s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
The house belonged to people in business .
" There it is .
How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her !"
" I will answer for it , that mine thinks herself full as clever , and would spurn any body ' s assistance ."
said she ; ` well , that is quite unexpected .
" It is a very simple story .
if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax !"
But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change to her destiny .
Mr . Weston was a native of Highbury , and born of a respectable family , which for the last two or three generations had been rising into gentility and property .
Ladies can never look ill . And , seriously , Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale , as almost always to give the appearance of ill health .-- A most deplorable want of complexion ."
But Mr . Woodhouse -- how was Mr . Woodhouse to be induced to consent ?-- he , who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as a distant event .
" I do not know why you should say so .
" Pray , Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , who had been smiling to herself through a great part of this speech , " how do you know that Mr . Martin did not speak yesterday ?"
This is brilliant indeed !-- This is admirable !-- Excellently contrived , upon my word .
Can you imagine any thing nearer perfect beauty than Emma altogether -- face and figure ?"
I shall not be far off , if you want me ."
One cannot wonder , one cannot wonder .
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account .-- I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow ."
" It was certainly never brilliant , but she would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general ; and there was a softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance to the character of her face ."
With the fortitude of a devoted novitiate , she had resolved at one - and - twenty to complete the sacrifice , and retire from all the pleasures of life , of rational intercourse , equal society , peace and hope , to penance and mortification for ever .
She was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed ; it was for him .
I have another person ' s interest at present so much at heart , that I cannot think any longer about Frank Churchill .
The unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been a little put aside by Elizabeth Martin ' s calling at Mrs . Goddard ' s a few days afterwards .
" I am not fond of dinner - visiting ," said he --" I never was .
The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove , " My brother Mr . Suckling ' s seat ;"-- a comparison of Hartfield to Maple Grove .
" That may be -- but not by sketches in Swisserland .
After another short hesitation , " I hope it does not proceed from -- I hope it is not in compliment to Mr .
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to - day ."
Oh , said I , Patty do not come with your bad news to me .
She had never rejoiced at the sound before , nor ever before entered the passage , nor walked up the stairs , with any wish of giving pleasure , but in conferring obligation , or of deriving it , except in subsequent ridicule .
But , upon my word , Mr . Elton , in your case , I should certainly excuse myself .
" Yes , so I imagined .
" Yes , papa , it is written out in our second page .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
You will never go to Swisserland .
It was after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs .
And she leaned back in the corner , to indulge her murmurs , or to reason them away ; probably a little of both -- such being the commonest process of a not ill - disposed mind .
I have heard him express himself so warmly on those points !-- Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte , and of her voice !
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
" Oh !
They were so deserving , that a _little_ higher should have been enough : but as it was , how could she have done otherwise ?-- Impossible !-- She could not repent .
_Perfection_ should not have come quite so soon ."
When one is in great pain , you know one cannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve .
Well , Miss Woodhouse , is he like what you expected ?
Emma ' s going away directly after tea might be giving offence .
" I do not pretend to fix on times or places , but I must tell you that I have good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of something to her advantage ."
My love for Mr . and Mrs . Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour ."
Long before he reappeared , attending the short , neat , brisk - moving aunt , and her elegant niece ,-- Mrs . Weston , like a sweet - tempered woman and a good wife , had examined the passage again , and found the evils of it much less than she had supposed before -- indeed very trifling ; and here ended the difficulties of decision .
Fortunately , however , it did cease .
Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry ; his interest was yet safe ; and she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment .
Something of a very unpleasant nature , I find , has occurred ;-- do let me know directly what it is .
" Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith !-- Very goodnatured , I declare ."
" My dear Miss Woodhouse , a vast deal may be done by those who dare to act .
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax .
Harriet was to be there in the evening , and the Bateses .
" But , my dear , pray do not make any more matches ; they are silly things , and break up one ' s family circle grievously ."
" Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately ?
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour .
" She could not compose herself -- Mr . Woodhouse would be alarmed -- she had better go ;"-- with most ready encouragement from her friend , therefore , she passed off through another door -- and the moment she was gone , this was the spontaneous burst of Emma ' s feelings : " Oh God !
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
" It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world ."
Emma could say no more .
He will think all the happiness , all the advantage , on your side of the question ; all the merit on mine .
Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax .
Her aunt is a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome .
Frank Churchill caught the name .
Every body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr . Elton , was disposed to pay him attention on his marriage .
Circumstances that might swell to half an hour ' s relation , and contained multiplied proofs to her who had seen them , had passed undiscerned by her who now heard them ; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned , the two of strongest promise to Harriet , were not without some degree of witness from Emma herself .-- The first , was his walking with her apart from the others , in the lime - walk at Donwell , where they had been walking some time before Emma came , and he had taken pains ( as she was convinced ) to draw her from the rest to himself -- and at first , he had talked to her in a more particular way than he had ever done before , in a very particular way indeed !--( Harriet could not recall it without a blush .)
" Ah !
A better written letter , Harriet ( returning it ,) than I had expected ."
She would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence , so justly and truly hers .
The same civilities and courtesies , the same success and satisfaction , took place on the morrow , and accompanied the whole progress of the picture , which was rapid and happy .
" Certainly .
She was pleased , on taking leave , to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend her out of the room , to go with her even downstairs ; it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of , to say ,
After tea , Mr . and Mrs . Weston , and Mr . Elton sat down with Mr . Woodhouse to cards .
With men he can be rational and unaffected , but when he has ladies to please , every feature works ."
Mr . Weston must be quiet , and every thing deliberately arranged .
" I thought he meant to try his skill , by his manner of declining it yesterday ."
I am sure I do not know ."
Yes .
He has been gone only four weeks ."
Miss Nash had been telling her something , which she repeated immediately with great delight .
He came back gay and self - satisfied , eager and busy , caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse , and defying Miss Smith .
