" I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time , you had very great amusement in tricking us all .-- I am sure you had .-- I am sure it was a consolation to you ."
said he , turning his eyes towards Jane .
Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters .
their luxury and ease .
" Good God !"
Miss Woodhouse , I am quite concerned , I am sure you hit your foot .
" Pray take care , Mrs . Weston , there is a step at the turning .
Emma saw him only once ; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him , or _just_ to miss him , _just_ to hear his voice , or see his shoulder , _just_ to have something occur to preserve him in her fancy , in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture .
For half an hour Mr . Weston was surprized and sorry ; but then he began to perceive that Frank ' s coming two or three months later would be a much better plan ; better time of year ; better weather ; and that he would be able , without any doubt , to stay considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner .
She would be such a delightful companion for Emma ."
She looked down the Randalls road .
CHAPTER II
How inconsiderate , how indelicate , how irrational , how unfeeling had been her conduct !
my poor dear child , the truth is , that in London it is always a sickly season .
Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet ' s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose , for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr . Elton ' s being a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ; and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints , she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet ' s side , as there could be any occasion for .
" You mistake me , you quite mistake me ," she replied , exerting herself .
" No , I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell me ."
" Dreadful !-- Exactly so , indeed .-- She will be missed every moment ."
Emma ' s politeness was at hand directly , to say , with smiling interest --
With a little reserve of manner , Emma continued :
" Very ."
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
It is the greatest amusement in the world !
We have nothing clever to say -- not one of us .
I wish Jane Fairfax very well ; but she tires me to death ."
" The ladies were all at home ."
" This was really his ," said Harriet .--" Do not you remember one morning ?-- no , I dare say you do not .
It must be done directly ; it must be done in London ; the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could be depended on ; and Isabella , the usual doer of all commissions , must not be applied to , because it was December , and Mr . Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December .
" Well ," said Emma , " there is no disputing about taste .-- At least you admire her except her complexion ."
With this treatment , Mr . Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking as usual .
-- She could really say nothing .--" You are silent ," he cried , with great animation ; " absolutely silent !
" I went only to the post - office ," said she , " and reached home before the rain was much .
They have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ; and Mrs . Martin talks of taking a boy another year ."
" I am very glad , indeed , my dear , to hear she is to be so comfortably settled .
It is such a happiness when good people get together -- and they always do .
" She is not entirely without it , I think ."
Surry is full of beauties ."
You must have heard every thing to be sure .
poor Miss Taylor !
" Well -- as you please ; only don ' t have a great set out .
Before this time last year I assure you we had had a delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston ."
Can it be woman ?
This lesson , she very much feared , they would receive only from herself ; she had little hope of Mr . Knightley , none of Mr . Weston .
" Our amiable young man is a very weak young man , if this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will of others .
" Oh !
Quite a surprize to me !
" Me !
This point was just arranged , when a visitor arrived to tear Emma ' s thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them , sleeping or waking , the last twenty - four hours -- Mrs . Weston , who had been calling on her daughter - in - law elect , and took Hartfield in her way home , almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself , to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview .
" You saw her answer !-- you wrote her answer too .
" It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world ."
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again , and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judging of his general manners , and by inference , of the meaning of his manners towards herself ; of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air ; and of fancying what the observations of all those might be , who were now seeing them together for the first time .
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning .
How they were all to be conveyed , he would have made a difficulty if he could , but as his son and daughter ' s carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield , he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head ; it hardly amounted to a doubt ; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also .
You look as if you would not do such a thing again ."
It was made a great favour of ; and altogether it was more than I could bear ; and so I never would finish it , to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness , to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square ;-- and , as I said , I did then forswear ever drawing any body again .
I will take it home with me at night ."
poor fellow !-- sad business for him .-- She was extremely concerned ; for , though very eccentric , he had a thousand good qualities .-- How could he be so taken in ?-- Did not think him at all in love -- not in the least .-- Poor Knightley !-- There would be an end of all pleasant intercourse with him .-- How happy he had been to come and dine with them whenever they asked him !
Her Bath habits made evening - parties perfectly natural to her , and Maple Grove had given her a taste for dinners .
He had walked up one day after dinner , as he very often did , to spend his evening at Hartfield .
" Oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never pleasing .
With an alacrity beyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to the credit of doing every thing well and attentively , with the real good - will of a mind delighted with its own ideas , did she then do all the honours of the meal , and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters , with an urgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civil scruples of their guests .
No , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond - street till just before he mounts his horse to - morrow .
I must confess it is a recommendation to me .
And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet ' s sake ; if he were to be thought of hereafter , as finding in Harriet ' s society all that he wanted ; if Harriet were to be the chosen , the first , the dearest , the friend , the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence ; what could be increasing Emma ' s wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind , that it had been all her own work ?
CHAPTER II
" A very serious sort , I assure you ;" still smiling .
After an interval of some minutes , however , he began with ,
When once it had been read , there was no doing any thing , but lament and exclaim .
I do not mean to set you against him , but indeed he is not quite the thing !"
With the greatest respect , and the warmest friendship , do I mention Miss Woodhouse ; my father perhaps will think I ought to add , with the deepest humiliation .-- A few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinion , and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to .-- My behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated , I believe , more than it ought .-- In order to assist a concealment so essential to me , I was led on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediately thrown .-- I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my ostensible object -- but I am sure you will believe the declaration , that had I not been convinced of her indifference , I would not have been induced by any selfish views to go on .-- Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is , she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached ; and that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me , was as much my conviction as my wish .-- She received my attentions with an easy , friendly , goodhumoured playfulness , which exactly suited me .
The day approached , the day arrived ; and after a morning of some anxious watching , Frank Churchill , in all the certainty of his own self , reached Randalls before dinner , and every thing was safe .
They would hardly come in their chaise , I think , at that season of the year .
He came to ask me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early ; whether I thought her too young : in short , whether I approved his choice altogether ; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered ( especially since _your_ making so much of her ) as in a line of society above him .
" I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject ," replied Emma , smiling ; " but you do not mean to deny that there was a time -- and not very distant either -- when you gave me reason to understand that you did care about him ?"
Depend upon it he had encouragement ."
Supper was announced .
The want of proper families in the place , and the conviction that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be tempted to attend , were mentioned ; but he was not satisfied .
I could not give any connected detail yesterday ; but the suddenness , and , in one light , the unseasonableness with which the affair burst out , needs explanation ; for though the event of the 26th ult ., as you will conclude , immediately opened to me the happiest prospects , I should not have presumed on such early measures , but from the very particular circumstances , which left me not an hour to lose .
If you think he will come , I shall think so too ; for you know Enscombe ."
His father would not own himself uneasy , and laughed at her fears ; but she could not be cured of wishing that he would part with his black mare .
To know that _she_ thought his coming certain was enough to make Emma consider it so , and sincerely did she rejoice in their joy .
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
" I cannot imagine ," said Mrs . Elton , ( feeling the indignity as a wife ought to do ,) " I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you , of all people in the world !
-- But ever since we had the history of that day , I have been so fond of Mr .
We will follow them to Hartfield .
" He had never seen so lovely a face , and was delighted with her naivete ."
Miss Woodhouse , do talk to me and make me comfortable again ."
She could see nothing but evil in it .
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour , and they had only accomplished some views of St . Mark ' s Place , Venice , when Frank Churchill entered the room .
She was sorry , very sorry .
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
Had she been a person of consequence herself , he would have come I dare say ; and it would not have signified whether he did or no .
It is natural , and it is honourable .-- Yes , honourable , I think , to chuse so well and so gratefully .-- But that it will be a fortunate preference is more that I can promise .
" With all my heart .
" I do pity you .
In the warmth of true contrition , she would call upon her the very next morning , and it should be the beginning , on her side , of a regular , equal , kindly intercourse .
I shall not be far off , if you want me ."
The next morning brought Mr . Frank Churchill again .
The kind - hearted , polite old man might then sit down and feel that he had done his duty , and made every fair lady welcome and easy .
Do not defer it .
