She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella , which Isabella never felt herself .
a man does not imagine any such thing .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
" Is not this most vexations , Knightley ?"
How can she find any appellation for them , deep enough in familiar vulgarity ?
Nobody is healthy in London , nobody can be .
" Yes ; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays .
" I lay it down as a general rule , Harriet , that if a woman _doubts_ as to whether she should accept a man or not , she certainly ought to refuse him .
Remember how few minutes I was at Randalls , and in how bewildered , how mad a state : and I am not much better yet ; still insane either from happiness or misery .
Do not distress her ."
I dare say she did not understand me ."
And Elizabeth , too .
A child on the watch , came towards them to beg ; and Miss Bickerton , excessively frightened , gave a great scream , and calling on Harriet to follow her , ran up a steep bank , cleared a slight hedge at the top , and made the best of her way by a short cut back to Highbury .
I was sure it could not be far off ; but I had put my huswife upon it , you see , without being aware , and so it was quite hid , but I had it in my hand so very lately that I was almost sure it must be on the table .
Mrs . and Miss Bates occupied the drawing - room floor ; and there , in the very moderate - sized apartment , which was every thing to them , the visitors were most cordially and even gratefully welcomed ; the quiet neat old lady , who with her knitting was seated in the warmest corner , wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse , and her more active , talking daughter , almost ready to overpower them with care and kindness , thanks for their visit , solicitude for their shoes , anxious inquiries after Mr . Woodhouse ' s health , cheerful communications about her mother ' s , and sweet - cake from the beaufet --" Mrs . Cole had just been there , just called in for ten minutes , and had been so good as to sit an hour with them , and _she_ had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as to say she liked it very much ; and , therefore , she hoped Miss Woodhouse and Miss Smith would do them the favour to eat a piece too ."
She had hoped for an answer here -- for a few words to say that her conduct was at least intelligible ; but he was silent ; and , as far as she could judge , deep in thought .
It is a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire ."
The affection of such a man as Mr . Elton would have been too great a distinction .-- She never could have deserved him -- and nobody but so partial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible .
I am sorry for _her_ .
Was not she the whole day with you ?"
Do you think it is a good one ?
It was a dislike so little just -- every imputed fault was so magnified by fancy , that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after any considerable absence , without feeling that she had injured her ; and now , when the due visit was paid , on her arrival , after a two years ' interval , she was particularly struck with the very appearance and manners , which for those two whole years she had been depreciating .
He did not boast , but it naturally betrayed itself , that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing , and on her laughing and noticing it , he owned that he believed ( excepting one or two points ) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing .
I should certainly have called at Hartfield , had you failed to come ."
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied .
You should not have done it , indeed you should not .
They hurried on , and were speedily at Randalls .--" Well , my dear ," said he , as they entered the room --" I have brought her , and now I hope you will soon be better .
What a blessing , that she never had any children !
The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else into the background .
CHAPTER I
Mr . Elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
You may imagine how desirable !
" No , I do not ; that is , I do not mean -- What shall I do ?
He is a most amiable , charming young man , I believe .
From that evening , or at least from the time of Miss Woodhouse ' s encouraging her to think of him , Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more than he had been used to do , and of his having indeed quite a different manner towards her ; a manner of kindness and sweetness !-- Latterly she had been more and more aware of it .
( with some elevation ) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance -- of Mr . Knightley ' s coming and asking me to dance , when Mr . Elton would not stand up with me ; and when there was no other partner in the room .
It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece of news , as proving that Mr . Elton could not have suffered long ; but she was sorry for Harriet : Harriet must feel it -- and all that she could hope was , by giving the first information herself , to save her from hearing it abruptly from others .
" Nay , how could I help saying what I did ?-- Nobody could have helped it .
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
I do indeed .
But ah !
As the sun is out , I believe I had better take my three turns while I can .
" But you will come again ," said Emma .
I dare say Mr . Knightley will be so kind as to meet him ."
" Jane Fairfax !-- Good God !
You left nothing undone .
" Such an eye !-- the true hazle eye -- and so brilliant !
Not regret her leaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man whom I could never admit as an acquaintance of my own !
Three months , she says so , positively , as I am going to have the pleasure of reading to you .
Poor Mr . Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming , and so anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride .-- Could he have seen the heart , he would have cared very little for the lungs ; but without the most distant imagination of the impending evil , without the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of either , he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news he had received from Mr . Perry , and talked on with much self - contentment , totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him in return .
She is not a sensible girl , nor a girl of any information .
" Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming , Miss Woodhouse .-- I quite rave about Jane Fairfax .-- A sweet , interesting creature .
But you , who have known Miss Fairfax from a child , must be a better judge of her character , and of how she is likely to conduct herself in critical situations , than I can be ."
Emma ' s courage returned , and she walked on .
" No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
" Nay , why do you ?"
She considered -- resolved -- and , trying to smile , began --
South End is an unhealthy place .
Somebody else believed _Mrs_ .
I shall not be far off , if you want me ."
Oh !
Mr . Knightley had spoken prophetically , when he once said , " Emma , you have been no friend to Harriet Smith ."
He had found her agitated and low .-- Frank Churchill was a villain .-- He heard her declare that she had never loved him .
A very few days brought the party from London , and she had no sooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet , than she became perfectly satisfied -- unaccountable as it was !-- that Robert Martin had thoroughly supplanted Mr . Knightley , and was now forming all her views of happiness .
She has now been a longer time stationary there , than she ever was before , and she begins to want change .
Soon after this Miss Bates came in , and Emma could not help being diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself , resulting , she supposed , from doubt of what might be said , and impatience to say every thing .
He had a comfortable home for her , and Emma imagined a very sufficient income ; for though the vicarage of Highbury was not large , he was known to have some independent property ; and she thought very highly of him as a good - humoured , well - meaning , respectable young man , without any deficiency of useful understanding or knowledge of the world .
Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs . Goddard ' s ; Mr . Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and great girls in the school ; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could have any chance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or repellent truth .
Yes , I see what she means , ( turning to Mr . Knightley ,) and I will try to hold my tongue .
One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by this removal ,-- the ball at the Crown .
I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment ; that considering the service he had rendered you , it was extremely natural :-- and you agreed to it , expressing yourself very warmly as to your sense of that service , and mentioning even what your sensations had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue .-- The impression of it is strong on my memory ."
" She will think Frank ought to ask her ."
How well she looked last night !"
And though the consequent shock and alarm was very great and much more durable -- indeed I believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again -- yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable .
Mr . Weston , however , too eager to be very observant , too communicative to want others to talk , was very well satisfied with what she did say , and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of what the whole room must have overheard already .
" I do not know .-- One of the Otways .-- Not Frank ;-- it is not Frank , I assure you .
I was glad you made her play so much , for having no instrument at her grandmother ' s , it must have been a real indulgence ."
Her attention was now claimed by Mr . Woodhouse , who being , according to his custom on such occasions , making the circle of his guests , and paying his particular compliments to the ladies , was ending with her -- and with all his mildest urbanity , said ,
He has been gone only four weeks ."
" Indeed !-- from Yorkshire , I think .
I always say there is something direful in the sound : but nothing more is positively known of the Tupmans , though a good many things I assure you are suspected ; and yet by their manners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother , Mr . Suckling , who happens to be one of their nearest neighbours .
" I hope she does .
" You surprize me !
I could not have believed it !
They were permitted to go alone ; and with a cordial nod from one , and a graceful bow from the other , the two gentlemen took leave .
" Mr . Elton indeed !"
Emma was most sincerely interested .
He may have as strong a sense of what would be right , as you can have , without being so equal , under particular circumstances , to act up to it ."
" That is what you have in your head , I know -- and what you would certainly say if my father were not by ."
It must , if I were not here .
" Robert Martin has no great loss -- if he can but think so ; and I hope it will not be long before he does .
I think their father is too rough with them very often ."
The regular and best families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite -- neither Donwell , nor Hartfield , nor Randalls .
She was quite convinced of Mr . Elton ' s being in the fairest way of falling in love , if not in love already .
How did you all behave ?
Her manners , too -- and Mr . Elton ' s , were unpleasant towards Harriet .
I have observed , Mrs . Elton , in the course of my life , that if things are going untowardly one month , they are sure to mend the next ."
Can you seriously ask me , Harriet , whether I imagined him attached to another woman at the very time that I was -- tacitly , if not openly -- encouraging you to give way to your own feelings ?-- I never had the slightest suspicion , till within the last hour , of Mr . Frank Churchill ' s having the least regard for Jane Fairfax .
And I know he has read the Vicar of Wakefield .
" Perhaps she might ; but it is not every man ' s fate to marry the woman who loves him best .
