And though the consequent shock and alarm was very great and much more durable -- indeed I believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again -- yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable .
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer .
yes -- did not you know ?-- Well , well , never mind ."
If ever there were people who , without having great wealth themselves , had every thing they could wish for , I am sure it is us .
I have done with match - making indeed .
And here , instead of its being a matter of condolence , it turns out to be one of congratulation .-- I congratulate you , Mr . Weston , with all my heart , on the prospect of having one of the most lovely and accomplished young women in England for your daughter ."
" I can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be under Mrs . Weston ' s care .
Quite thick shoes .
.
" You forget how much she belongs to Highbury .
" I hope she does .
" If I can come again , we are still to have our ball .
" Well ," said she at last , trying to recover herself ; " this is a circumstance which I must think of at least half a day , before I can at all comprehend it .
The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself ; and Mrs . Weston ' s heart and time would be occupied by it .
" But it is too far , indeed it is , to be walking quite alone .
As for Isabella , she has been married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the Mr . Westons aside as much as she can ."
Mr . Weston , I dare say , has been telling you exactly how the matter stands ?"
Mr . Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence , and were sitting with her father .-- Mr .
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing - up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through -- and very good lists they were -- very well chosen , and very neatly arranged -- sometimes alphabetically , and sometimes by some other rule .
It was badly done , indeed !
We shall know more about them all , in half an hour , from you , than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year ."
but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand .
Mr . Elton is good - humoured , cheerful , obliging , and gentle .
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
You do not mean it ?"
I shall sit by you .
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer .
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl , which she trusted , with such frequent meetings at Hartfield , was foundation enough on his side ; and on Harriet ' s there could be little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy .
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble .
That is what she writes about .
All was safe and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another , Emma , being now certain of her ball , began to adopt as the next vexation Mr . Knightley ' s provoking indifference about it .
Miss Woodhouse , how you do forget !"
" So extremely like Maple Grove !
Jane ' s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma .
I do not pretend to Emma ' s genius for foretelling and guessing .
" Be satisfied ," said he , " I will not raise any outcry .
such delicacy !-- and yet without being actually fair .-- One cannot call her fair .
Oh !
" Ah !
Mr . Perry is not gone ."
" Here have I ," said she , " actually talked poor Harriet into being very much attached to this man .
It was known that they were a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was .
" Nay , dear Emma , now I must take his part ; for though he has been wrong in this instance , I have known him long enough to answer for his having many , very many , good qualities ; and --"
It will be the only difference ."
She thought it in reality a sad exchange for herself , to have him with his grave looks and reluctant conversation opposed to her instead of his brother .
" Emma never thinks of herself , if she can do good to others ," rejoined Mr . Woodhouse , understanding but in part .
The quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr . Woodhouse , who had often been distressed by the more animated sort , which Mr . Weston had occasionally introduced , and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting , with tender melancholy , over the departure of the " poor little boys ," or in fondly pointing out , as he took up any stray letter near him , how beautifully Emma had written it .
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
A Miss Hawkins -- that ' s all I know .
Even then , I was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time ; but I was the injured person , injured by her coldness , and I went away determined that she should make the first advances .-- I shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party .
Why does he make it any business of his , to wonder at what I do ?-- at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another ?-- I may be allowed , I hope , the use of my judgment as well as Mr .
Mr . John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th , and we ought to be thankful , papa , that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to the country , that two or three days are not to be taken out for the Abbey .
She must see more of him to understand his ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable .
Their being fixed , so absolutely fixed , in the same place , was bad for each , for all three .
" Yes ; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction .
Pain is no expiation .
I like him very well ."
A man at his age -- what is he ?-- three or four - and - twenty -- cannot be without the means of doing as much as that .
I must not quarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towards myself ; but , otherwise , I should loudly protest against the share of it which that woman has known .-- ` Jane ,' indeed !-- You will observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name , even to you .
Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence , with only one attempt on Emma ' s side to talk of the weather , but he made no answer .
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
--" At a watering - place , or in a common London acquaintance , it was difficult to decide on such points .
Neither Mr . Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them ; and we used sometimes to say very cutting things !
She meant to be very happy , in spite of the scene being laid at Mr . Cole ' s ; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr . Elton , even in the days of his favour , none had disturbed her more than his propensity to dine with Mr . Cole .
You do not know it I dare say , but two or three years ago I had a great passion for taking likenesses , and attempted several of my friends , and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general .
Mr . Knightley and Harriet had arrived during her absence , and were sitting with her father .-- Mr .
here it comes .
" That I am sure you would .
Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates , but she wished she had left her ten minutes earlier ;-- it would have been a great pleasure to talk over Jane Fairfax ' s situation with Mr .
He had time only to say ,
" Oh !
There is always some talent in it .
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man , for she hardly knew what indisposition was ; and if he did not invent illnesses for her , she could make no figure in a message .
Mrs . Weston was convinced that such conversation must be the greatest relief to her companion , pent up within her own mind as every thing had so long been , and was very much pleased with all that she had said on the subject .
I will do my best .
The idea of Mr . Elton was certainly cheering ; but still , after a time , she was tender - hearted again towards the rejected Mr . Martin .
Emma was extremely glad to see him -- but there was a degree of confusion -- a number of embarrassing recollections on each side .
I am sure we do .
Concession must be out of the question ; but it was time to appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled ; and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship , that when he came into the room she had one of the children with her -- the youngest , a nice little girl about eight months old , who was now making her first visit to Hartfield , and very happy to be danced about in her aunt ' s arms .
To Miss --
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary , indeed , and that she had not a syllable to say for him .
" That is ," replied Mr . Knightley , " she will indulge her even more than she did you , and believe that she does not indulge her at all .
I saw her as I came in ; she was standing in the entrance .
The symptoms were favourable .-- Instead of answering , Harriet turned away confused , and stood thoughtfully by the fire ; and though the letter was still in her hand , it was now mechanically twisted about without regard .
This to _me_ !
" Dear me !-- it is so odd to hear a woman talk so !"
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs . Elton for what was called an _introduction_ -- of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs . Elton ' s -- probably some vulgar , dashing widow , who , with the help of a boarder , just made a shift to live !-- The dignity of Miss Woodhouse , of Hartfield , was sunk indeed !
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter ; to escape a little from the latter , he went to the pianoforte , and begged Miss Fairfax , who was still sitting at it , to play something more .
The party was rather large , as it included one other family , a proper unobjectionable country family , whom the Coles had the advantage of naming among their acquaintance , and the male part of Mr . Cox ' s family , the lawyer of Highbury .
She had hurried on before her guests to prepare her father for their appearance , and was beyond the reach of Mr . Weston ' s hint .
CHAPTER III
This is a sort of dull - looking evening , that ought to be treated rather as winter than summer .
" I am afraid ," returned Emma , sighing , " that I must often have contributed to make her unhappy ."
Mr . Frank Churchill did not come .
The pleasantness of the morning had induced him to walk forward , and leave his horses to meet him by another road , a mile or two beyond Highbury -- and happening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of Miss Bates , and to have forgotten to restore them , he had been obliged to stop at her door , and go in for a few minutes : he was therefore later than he had intended ; and being on foot , was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them .
think a farmer , ( and with all his sense and all his merit Mr . Martin is nothing more ,) a good match for my intimate friend !
" In that respect how unlike dear Mrs . Elton , who wants to be wiser and wittier than all the world !
cried Emma ; " at that rate , what will become of her ?"
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer .
He was no dancer in general .
