A long time , is not it , for a cold to hang upon her ?
Then here is my last ,"-- unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size , whole - length --" my last and my best -- my brother , Mr . John Knightley .-- This did not want much of being finished , when I put it away in a pet , and vowed I would never take another likeness .
When Mr . Cole had moved away , and her attention could be restored as before , she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax , who was sitting exactly opposite .
" Thank you , dear Miss Woodhouse .
It would be dreadful to be standing so close !
.
I do not by any means engage for its being returned .
Every body had a degree of gravity and sorrow ; tenderness towards the departed , solicitude for the surviving friends ; and , in a reasonable time , curiosity to know where she would be buried .
A few more to - morrows , and the party from London would be arriving .
Weston !-- Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a gentlewoman !
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
A thousand vexatious thoughts would recur .
Emma ' s eyes were instantly withdrawn ; and she sat silently meditating , in a fixed attitude , for a few minutes .
" Well ;-- if _you_ wish me to stay and join the party , I will ."
With this inspiriting notion , her questions increased in number and meaning ; and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr . Martin , and there was evidently no dislike to it .
But do come in .
" Is she unwell ?"
It was a sweet view -- sweet to the eye and the mind .
" That is what you have in your head , I know -- and what you would certainly say if my father were not by ."
In one moment such a change !
She is still nearer .-- And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body .
" You will not find either , between Donwell and Highbury .
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way -- just across the lawn ; and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put me so exactly in mind !
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
As they were turning into the grounds , Mr . Perry passed by on horseback .
I think , on the contrary , when people shut themselves up entirely from society , it is a very bad thing ; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree , without living in it either too much or too little .
My blindness to what was going on , led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed of , and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures , but I have no other reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier ."
I certainly will not persuade myself to feel more than I do .
said Frank Churchill , as soon as they were out of hearing :--" How well they suit one another !-- Very lucky -- marrying as they did , upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place !-- They only knew each other , I think , a few weeks in Bath !
cried Mr . John Knightley , hearing his own name .
They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs . and Miss Bates .
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend -- her fair , lovely , amiable friend .
One half of the world cannot understand the pleasures of the other ."
He liked very much to have his friends come and see him ; and from various united causes , from his long residence at Hartfield , and his good nature , from his fortune , his house , and his daughter , he could command the visits of his own little circle , in a great measure , as he liked .
Well , ( smiling ,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion has produced exertion and relief to the sufferers , it has done all that is truly important .
Miss Bates was obliged to return without success ; Jane was quite unpersuadable ; the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her worse .-- Emma wished she could have seen her , and tried her own powers ; but , almost before she could hint the wish , Miss Bates made it appear that she had promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in .
cried Emma , collecting herself resolutely --" Let us understand each other now , without the possibility of farther mistake .
The quiet , heart - felt satisfaction of the old lady , and the rapturous delight of her daughter -- who proved even too joyous to talk as usual , had been a gratifying , yet almost an affecting , scene .
Mr . Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girls , and tried very often to recollect something worth their putting in .
If I could but see her again !-- But I must not propose it yet .
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
" He has been wanting to come to us ," continued Mr . Weston , " ever since September : every letter has been full of it ; but he cannot command his own time .
You will hardly believe me -- but twice in one week he and Mr . Bragge went to London and back again with four horses ."
Two such she did not want .
I know it has .
Dixon in them ."
I will say that for you ."
Oh !
Isabella and Emma , I think , do write very much alike .
-- and " Dear Miss Woodhouse ," was all that Harriet , with many tender embraces could articulate at first ; but when they did arrive at something more like conversation , it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw , felt , anticipated , and remembered just as she ought .
" Poor child !"
" I am almost certain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to - morrow .-- Mr .
Mr . Churchill had made a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost ; and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum ."
I think him a very handsome young man , and his manners are precisely what I like and approve -- so truly the gentleman , without the least conceit or puppyism .
Ah !
The disguise , equivocation , mystery , so hateful to her to practise , might soon be over .
Emma had never been to Box Hill ; she wished to see what every body found so well worth seeing , and she and Mr . Weston had agreed to chuse some fine morning and drive thither .
" I know _that_ is the feeling of you all .
My aunt always sends me off when she is shopping .
A man at his age -- what is he ?-- three or four - and - twenty -- cannot be without the means of doing as much as that .
" This is most kind , indeed !-- Miss Woodhouse , it is impossible for me to express -- I hope you will believe -- Excuse me for being so entirely without words ."
" I do not know whether it ought to be so , but certainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way .
You forget how time passes ."
It is infinitely too bad .
-- And when Mrs . Bates was saying something to Emma , whispered farther , " We do not say a word of any _assistance_ that Perry might have ; not a word of a certain young physician from Windsor .-- Oh !
I would give any money for it .
` The consequence ,' said she , ` has been a state of perpetual suffering to me ; and so it ought .
Now Emma could , indeed , enjoy Mr . Knightley ' s visits ; now she could talk , and she could listen with true happiness , unchecked by that sense of injustice , of guilt , of something most painful , which had haunted her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her , how much might at that moment , and at a little distance , be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself .
She speaks a little too quick .
You seem shut out from every thing -- in the most complete retirement .-- And Mrs . Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy that sort of seclusion .
Harriet looked white and frightened , and he was trying to cheer her .-- The iron gates and the front - door were not twenty yards asunder ;-- they were all three soon in the hall , and Harriet immediately sinking into a chair fainted away .
" In short ," said he , " perhaps , Miss Woodhouse -- I think you can hardly be quite without suspicion "--
-- repeated Mr .
" He should be happy to see Mrs . Goddard .
It opens his designs to his family , it introduces you among them , it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature , eager curiosity and warm prepossession .
Poor girl !
For once in your life you would be obliged to own yourself mistaken .
she cried .--" Well !"
I am very happy .
It was a done thing ; Mr . Elton was to go , and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment ; never had his smile been stronger , nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her .
And the same may be said of Mrs . Jeffereys -- Clara Partridge , that was -- and of the two Milmans , now Mrs . Bird and Mrs . James Cooper ; and of more than I can enumerate .
if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided and open !-- Good - bye , good - bye ."
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
" Now , ma ' am ," said Jane to her aunt , " shall we join Mrs .
" Myself creating what I saw ,"
" Upon my word ," exclaimed Emma , " you amuse me !
I never had much opinion of the sea air ."
CHAPTER I
Do put up your horse at the Crown , and come in ."
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
I doubt whether he will return the compliment , and discover her to be a lady .
I dare say she did not understand me ."
To know that he has not thrown himself away , is such a comfort !-- She does seem a charming young woman , just what he deserves .
The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of the approaching winter , had proved erroneous ; no friends had deserted them , no pleasures had been lost .-- But her present forebodings she feared would experience no similar contradiction .
They have more gentleness .
" Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately ?
He went to town on business three days ago , and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send to John .-- He delivered these papers to John , at his chambers , and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley ' s .
I am losing all my bitterness against spoilt children , my dearest Emma .
I dare say Mr . Knightley will be so kind as to meet him ."
" Yes , and what you told me on that head , confirmed an idea which I had entertained before .-- I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr . Dixon or Miss Fairfax , but I cannot help suspecting either that , after making his proposals to her friend , he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_ , or that he became conscious of a little attachment on her side .
