if you were to see what a headache she has .
The black mare was blameless ; _they_ were right who had named Mrs . Churchill as the cause .
Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable ; the conviction was strengthened by what followed .
Such kind friends , you know , Miss Woodhouse , one must always find agreeable , though every body seemed rather fagged after the morning ' s party .
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter .
We shall enjoy him completely ; every thing has turned out exactly as we could wish ."
Emma ' s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on , by Harriet ' s being to stay longer ; her fortnight was likely to be a month at least .
My mother is delightfully well ; and Jane caught no cold last night .
Emma could hardly understand him ; he seemed in an odd humour .
Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could , she soon afterwards took possession of a narrow footpath , a little raised on one side of the lane , leaving them together in the main road .
" Oh , Mrs . Churchill ; every body knows Mrs . Churchill ," replied Isabella : " and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without the greatest compassion .
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
Two such she did not want .
She has been taught nothing useful , and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself .
I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea has been given me by circumstances ; and if Mr . Knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on Henry ' s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?"
The contrast between Mrs . Churchill ' s importance in the world , and Jane Fairfax ' s , struck her ; one was every thing , the other nothing -- and she sat musing on the difference of woman ' s destiny , and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed , till roused by Miss Bates ' s saying ,
" I had only my own family to study from .
His mother is perfectly right not to be in a hurry .
Harriet ' s claims to marry well are not so contemptible as you represent them .
so silly -- so satisfied -- so smiling -- so prosing -- so undistinguishing and unfastidious -- and so apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me , I would marry to - morrow .
Her own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing ; it was not worth thinking of ;-- but if he , who had undoubtedly been always so much the most in love of the two , were to be returning with the same warmth of sentiment which he had taken away , it would be very distressing .
Mr . Elton was called out of the room before tea , old John Abdy ' s son wanted to speak with him .
" Insufferable woman !"
Somebody else believed _Mrs_ .
There she sat -- and who would have guessed how many tears she had been lately shedding ?
I never saw Mrs . Weston better in my life -- never looking so well .
But take care of yourself .
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
But I shall want the ribbon directly -- so it had better go to Hartfield -- at least the ribbon .
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty - spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
But Mr . Elton , in person , had driven away all such cares .
Yes .
Leave it all to me .
" A bad thing !
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
His father only called him a coxcomb , and thought it a very good story ; but that Mrs . Weston did not like it , was clear enough , by her passing it over as quickly as possible , and making no other comment than that " all young people would have their little whims ."
Some people were always cross when they were hot .
" Might he not ?-- Is not it possible , that when enquiring , as you thought , into the state of your affections , he might be alluding to Mr . Martin -- he might have Mr . Martin ' s interest in view ?
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr . Weston ' s on the subject , as much as possible .
Did you ever hear of that ?-- A water party ; and by some accident she was falling overboard .
Isabella and Emma , I think , do write very much alike .
" That will never be , however , I can assure you .
And , by what I understand , you might have had lodgings there quite away from the sea -- a quarter of a mile off -- very comfortable .
Such a sad loss to our party to - day !"
" Some very fine morning , he , and Emma , and Harriet , could go very well ; and he could sit still with Mrs . Weston , while the dear girls walked about the gardens .
But you had better go with Mrs . Weston and hear the instrument ."
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
The very day of Mr . Elton ' s going to London produced a fresh occasion for Emma ' s services towards her friend .
To do what would be most generally pleasing must be our object -- if one could but tell what that would be ."
But this was not judged feasible .
On his side were the inquiries ,--" Was she a horsewoman ?-- Pleasant rides ?-- Pleasant walks ?-- Had they a large neighbourhood ?-- Highbury , perhaps , afforded society enough ?-- There were several very pretty houses in and about it .-- Balls -- had they balls ?-- Was it a musical society ?"
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him ; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable .
It must be very clever , or he would not have brought it .
" Elegant , agreeable manners , I was prepared for ," said he ; " but I confess that , considering every thing , I had not expected more than a very tolerably well - looking woman of a certain age ; I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs .
I have taken some pains for your sake , and for Robert Martin ' s sake , ( whom I have always had reason to believe as much in love with her as ever ,) to get acquainted with her .
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ; but Harriet only wanted drawing out , and receiving a few , very few hints .
Many a time has she said so ; and yet I am no advocate for entire seclusion .
But she had believed them to be well - meaning , worthy people before ; and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion ?
It could not be otherwise .
But there was no doing any thing , with Mr . Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch .
Do not be impatient , Emma ; it will all come out too soon ."
" I am to hear from him soon ," continued Mrs . Weston .
Richard ?-- I saw you the other day as you rode through the town -- Mrs . Otway , I protest !-- and good Mr . Otway , and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline .-- Such a host of friends !-- and Mr . George and Mr .
The strength of the song falls on the second ."
was not that her own doing too ?
" Is not she looking well ?"
There were Mr . and Mrs . Weston ; delighted to see her and receive her approbation , very busy and very happy in their different way ; she , in some little distress ; and he , finding every thing perfect .
I will bring friends with me ."
She could not flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_ .
" No , not at Randalls ; I have not been near Randalls ," when the door was thrown open , and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room .
My dear Isabella , I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr . Perry yet ; and he never forgets you ."
She had suffered very much from cramp after dancing , and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless -- and in this state , and exceedingly terrified , she had been obliged to remain .
How that visit was to be acknowledged -- what would be necessary -- and what might be safest , had been a point of some doubtful consideration .
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk ."
But ah !
cried Jane , with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thought infinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usual composure --" there would have been no danger .
" Oh !
By your account , he does seem to have had some scruples .
He knows I have a thorough regard for him and all his family , and , I believe , considers me as one of his best friends .
" You would not have encouraged me , then , if you had understood me ?
This proves that he can leave the Churchills ."
" Well ," said Emma , " there is no disputing about taste .-- At least you admire her except her complexion ."
We were speaking of it only yesterday , and agreeing how fortunate it was for Emma , that there should be such a girl in Highbury for her to associate with .
My mother ' s are really very good indeed .
She bitterly regretted not having sought a closer acquaintance with her , and blushed for the envious feelings which had certainly been , in some measure , the cause .
" Shall I ring the bell ?"
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
When she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be very much in love ; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings .
He has passed you very often ."
Little things do not irritate him .
Elton ."
" Nonsensical girl !"
Before the end of September , Emma attended Harriet to church , and saw her hand bestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction , as no remembrances , even connected with Mr . Elton as he stood before them , could impair .-- Perhaps , indeed , at that time she scarcely saw Mr . Elton , but as the clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall on herself .-- Robert Martin and Harriet Smith , the latest couple engaged of the three , were the first to be married .
-- Highbury , with Mrs . Weston , stood for Hartfield ; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction with him .
South End is prohibited , if you please .
Her care and attention could not be questioned ; they were , in fact , only too great .
Emma saw him only once ; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure _just_ to meet with him , or _just_ to miss him , _just_ to hear his voice , or see his shoulder , _just_ to have something occur to preserve him in her fancy , in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture .
" This is an alliance which , whoever -- whatever your friends may be , must be agreeable to them , provided at least they have common sense ; and we are not to be addressing our conduct to fools .
just behind .
If the talking aunt had taken me quite by surprize , it must have been the death of me .
