Any nonsense will serve .
She watched him well .
Emma allowed her father to talk -- but supplied her visitors in a much more satisfactory style , and on the present evening had particular pleasure in sending them away happy .
no , it is a meeting at the Crown , a regular meeting .
I should wish it ."
For it is not five minutes since I received Mrs . Cole ' s note -- no , it cannot be more than five -- or at least ten -- for I had got my bonnet and spencer on , just ready to come out -- I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork -- Jane was standing in the passage -- were not you , Jane ?-- for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting - pan large enough .
Mr . Perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr . Woodhouse ' s life ; and upon being applied to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless taken moderately .
Quite otherwise indeed , if I understood Miss Fairfax ' s opinion last night ."
He made no answer ; merely looked , and bowed in submission ; and soon afterwards said , in a lively tone ,
cried Harriet indignantly .--" Oh !
Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months ; the Campbells were gone to Ireland for three months ; but now the Campbells had promised their daughter to stay at least till Midsummer , and fresh invitations had arrived for her to join them there .
I have been but half a friend to her ; and if she were _not_ to feel this disappointment so very much , I am sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;-- William Coxe -- Oh !
He was considering her as the source of all the happiness they offered .
" Do come with me ," said Mrs . Weston , " if it be not very disagreeable to you .
A great deal of very reasonable , very just displeasure I had to persuade away .
" Now he has got my letter ," said she softly .
Emma , finding her so determined upon neglecting her music , had nothing more to say ; and , after a moment ' s pause , Mrs . Elton chose another subject .
Consider what you are about .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
" My being charming , Harriet , is not quite enough to induce me to marry ; I must find other people charming -- one other person at least .
He was warm in his reprobation of Mr . Elton ' s conduct ; it had been unpardonable rudeness ; and Mrs . Elton ' s looks also received the due share of censure .
The wedding was very much like other weddings , where the parties have no taste for finery or parade ; and Mrs . Elton , from the particulars detailed by her husband , thought it all extremely shabby , and very inferior to her own .--" Very little white satin , very few lace veils ; a most pitiful business !-- Selina would stare when she heard of it ."
I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way , but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue .
Emma laughed and disclaimed .
" We want only two more to be just the right number .
They lived beyond their income , but still it was nothing in comparison of Enscombe : she did not cease to love her husband , but she wanted at once to be the wife of Captain Weston , and Miss Churchill of Enscombe .
no -- a very bad plan .
She made her plan ; she would speak of something totally different -- the children in Brunswick Square ; and she only waited for breath to begin , when Mr . Knightley startled her , by saying ,
All manner of solemn nonsense was talked on the subject , but I believed none of it .
It was not with Mrs . Suckling , it was not with Mrs . Bragge , but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them : it was with a cousin of Mrs . Bragge , an acquaintance of Mrs . Suckling , a lady known at Maple Grove .
the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give him cheerfuller views !
He only means --"
You were very popular before you came , because you were Mr . Weston ' s son -- but lay out half a guinea at Ford ' s , and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues ."
He could not believe her to be encouraging him .
This is brilliant indeed !-- This is admirable !-- Excellently contrived , upon my word .
It is such a happiness when good people get together -- and they always do .
Time , you may be sure , will make one or the other of us think differently ; and , in the meanwhile , we need not talk much on the subject ."
It was short , but expressed good sense , warm attachment , liberality , propriety , even delicacy of feeling .
" How very pleasing and proper of him !"
Isabella then went to Emma ; but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away ; and they were still discussing the point , when Mr . Knightley , who had left the room immediately after his brother ' s first report of the snow , came back again , and told them that he had been out of doors to examine , and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home , whenever they liked it , either now or an hour hence .
I have observed , Mrs . Elton , in the course of my life , that if things are going untowardly one month , they are sure to mend the next ."
" She meant to be impertinently curious , just as such an Anne Cox should be ."
" She is a riddle , quite a riddle !"
He was coming through the hall .
Nobody is healthy in London , nobody can be .
The unpersuadable point , which he did not mention , Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father .
It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey , that as soon as she was satisfied of her father ' s comfort , she was glad to leave him , and look around her ; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more particular observation , more exact understanding of a house and grounds which must ever be so interesting to her and all her family .
Soon afterwards he began again ,
It does not bear talking of ."
It may bring many extenuations .
It ought to be a first object , as I am sure poor Miss Taylor ' s always was with me .
" I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man .
" No , I do not know that Mr . Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly except --
` I did not make the allowances ,' said she , ` which I ought to have done , for his temper and spirits -- his delightful spirits , and that gaiety , that playfulness of disposition , which , under any other circumstances , would , I am sure , have been as constantly bewitching to me , as they were at first .'
When she became sensible of this , it struck her that she could not be very much in love ; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to quit her father , never to marry , a strong attachment certainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings .
Were she your equal in situation -- but , Emma , consider how far this is from being the case .
Any thing else I should be most happy to do , at your command -- but my dancing days are over ."
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
Perry .-- I want his directions no more than his drugs ."
Time , you may be sure , will make one or the other of us think differently ; and , in the meanwhile , we need not talk much on the subject ."
" You did behave very shamefully .
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
They will be extremely glad to see you , I am sure ; and one of my servants shall go with you to shew you the way ."
Well , pretty good news , is not it ?
no -- there is nothing to surprize one at all .-- A pretty fortune ; and she came in his way ."
" Poor Mrs . Churchill !
It may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood .
" Did you ever have your likeness taken , Harriet ?"
" But why should you be sorry , sir ?-- I assure you , it did the children a great deal of good ."
" Yes ," said Emma , " I hope I do ."
Such things in general cannot be too short ."
Are you in any doubt as to that ?
I am doatingly fond of music -- passionately fond ;-- and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste ; but as to any thing else , upon my honour my performance is _mediocre_ to the last degree .
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look ; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be charmed .-- There was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
But it should be so no more .
And I think she feels it .
convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield .
I must buy something at Ford ' s .
Harriet submitted , though her mind could hardly separate the parts , so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love .
" Yes ," said his brother quickly , " it is Randalls that does it all ."
It was all my doing , I know .
I think , on the contrary , when people shut themselves up entirely from society , it is a very bad thing ; and that it is much more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree , without living in it either too much or too little .
These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick .
" I would not go away without seeing you , but I have no time to spare , and therefore must now be gone directly .
Emma was in no danger of forgetting .
We admired it so much , that I have ventured to write it into Miss Smith ' s collection .
She was in no hurry at all .
" Only think of our happening to meet him !-- How very odd !
She must tell you herself what she is -- yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .-- Since I began this letter , which will be longer than I foresaw , I have heard from her .-- She gives a good account of her own health ; but as she never complains , I dare not depend .
-- Highbury , with Mrs . Weston , stood for Hartfield ; and she trusted to its bearing the same construction with him .
" I shall not scold you .
The child of good fortune !
There is always a look of consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneath them .
-- Even Mr . Weston shook his head , and looked solemn , and said , " Ah !
No misfortune occurred , again to prevent the ball .
So much the better .
They would feel that they could trust him ; that the nephew who had done rightly by his father , would do rightly by them ; for they know , as well as he does , as well as all the world must know , that he ought to pay this visit to his father ; and while meanly exerting their power to delay it , are in their hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims .
To give up one ' s child !
Such events are very interesting , but the suspense of them cannot last long .
Jane was forced to smile completely , for a moment ; and the smile partly remained as she turned towards him , and said in a conscious , low , yet steady voice ,
