She has a fault .
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
It was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
" When I talked of your being altered by time , by the progress of years ," said John Knightley , " I meant to imply the change of situation which time usually brings .
" As to the circumstances of her birth , though in a legal sense she may be called Nobody , it will not hold in common sense .
( turning to Emma .)
He did , on the condition of some promises on her side : such as that , if she came home cold , she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly ; if hungry , that she would take something to eat ; that her own maid should sit up for her ; and that Serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house , as usual .
at present I ask no more ."
She had talked her into love ; but , alas !
You will have my sketches , some time or other , to look at -- or my tour to read -- or my poem .
Mrs . Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , & c ., set out in the little room ; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
You are so kind !"
Dear Miss Woodhouse , do advise me ."
He cut her short with ,
I am sure I was very much surprized when I first heard she was going to be married ."
He had been at the pains of consulting Mr . Perry , the apothecary , on the subject .
Have you thought , my dear , where you shall put her -- and what room there will be for the children ?"
said Emma playfully .
" It will be natural for me ," he added shortly afterwards , " to speak my opinion aloud as I read .
The Coles expressed themselves so properly -- there was so much real attention in the manner of it -- so much consideration for her father .
" Part of my lace is gone ," said she , " and I do not know how I am to contrive .
" Well , Emma , I do not believe I have any thing more to say about the boys ; but you have your sister ' s letter , and every thing is down at full length there we may be sure .
Vanity working on a weak head , produces every sort of mischief .
I am sure I have not got one half so good ."
Mrs . Perry was always particularly fond of my mother -- indeed I do not know who is not -- and she had mentioned it to her in confidence ; she had no objection to her telling us , of course , but it was not to go beyond : and , from that day to this , I never mentioned it to a soul that I know of .
Somebody else believed _Mrs_ .
It was easy to decide that she was still too young ; and Jane remained with them , sharing , as another daughter , in all the rational pleasures of an elegant society , and a judicious mixture of home and amusement , with only the drawback of the future , the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over .
" Such a fortnight as it has been !"
Something occurred while they were at Hartfield , to make Emma want their advice ; and , which was still more lucky , she wanted exactly the advice they gave .
Depend upon it , a man of six or seven - and - twenty can take care of himself ."
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
They were the first entitled , after Mrs . Weston and Emma , to be made happy ;-- from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax , but she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley , that it would have been too positive an interruption ; and finding himself close to Mrs . Elton , and her attention disengaged , he necessarily began on the subject with her .
It seemed to him a very ill - judged measure ."
If you prefer Mr . Martin to every other person ; if you think him the most agreeable man you have ever been in company with , why should you hesitate ?
Every thing declared it ; his own attentions , his father ' s hints , his mother - in - law ' s guarded silence ; it was all in unison ; words , conduct , discretion , and indiscretion , told the same story .
She had long resolved that one - and - twenty should be the period .
Harriet ' s cheerful look and manner established hers : she came back , not to think of Mr . Martin , but to talk of Mr . Elton .
Did not keep the horses a moment .
I dare not let my mother know how little she eats -- so I say one thing and then I say another , and it passes off .
evil to some is always good to others .
yes , I am quite aware of that .
Sixteen miles -- nay , eighteen -- it must be full eighteen to Manchester - street -- was a serious obstacle .
" I cannot name a day ," said he , " till I have spoken to some others whom I would wish to meet you ."
What could he mean by such horrible indelicacy ?
This was very kind of you to be persuaded to come .
I do not know who would ever look at him in the company of the other .
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman , rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers , and decent enough to have always wished for concealment .-- Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for !-- It was likely to be as untainted , perhaps , as the blood of many a gentleman : but what a connexion had she been preparing for Mr . Knightley -- or for the Churchills -- or even for Mr .
A bride , you know , must appear like a bride , but my natural taste is all for simplicity ; a simple style of dress is so infinitely preferable to finery .
What shall I say ?"
` You _must_ _all_ spend your evening with us ,' said she --` I positively must have you _all_ come .'"
They went in ; and while the sleek , well - tied parcels of " Men ' s Beavers " and " York Tan " were bringing down and displaying on the counter , he said --" But I beg your pardon , Miss Woodhouse , you were speaking to me , you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_ _patriae_ .
Mr . Elton knows you ."
a man does not imagine any such thing .
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
When Mr . Weston joined the party , however , and when the baby was fetched , there was no longer a want of subject or animation -- or of courage and opportunity for Frank Churchill to draw near her and say ,
" Poor child !"
I should not have used the expression .
Now , an attachment to Harriet Smith would have nothing to encounter .
You will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax was in Highbury ; and as _you_ were the person slighted , you will forgive me instantly ; but I must work on my father ' s compassion , by reminding him , that so long as I absented myself from his house , so long I lost the blessing of knowing you .
" Oh yes ; next week ."
But if you want to shew him any attention , my dear , ask him to come and dine with us some day .
He seemed not merely happy with her , but proud .
Were not you struck ?
You may be very sure that if I had , I should have cautioned you accordingly ."
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
When the Westons arrived , the kindest looks of love , the strongest of admiration were for her , from both husband and wife ; the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked her as his peculiar object , and at dinner she found him seated by her -- and , as she firmly believed , not without some dexterity on his side .
" How d ' ye do ?-- how d ' ye do ?-- We have been sitting with your father -- glad to see him so well .
So obliged to you for the carriage last night .
" That Mr . Elton should really be in love with me ,-- me , of all people , who did not know him , to speak to him , at Michaelmas !
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
She would be a loser in every way .
A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed , and then , about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage , an old and not very good house , almost as close to the road as it could be .
It seems an impossibility !-- You cannot mean to say , that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin .
There had been no real affection either in his language or manners .
A few more to - morrows , and the party from London would be arriving .
-- But , in spite of these deficiencies , the wishes , the hopes , the confidence , the predictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the ceremony , were fully answered in the perfect happiness of the union .
" If it would be good to her , I am sure it would be evil to himself ; a very shameful and degrading connexion .
" By all means , if you can ."
Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn .
" Three o ' clock yesterday !
There was a seriousness in Harriet ' s manner which prepared her , quite as much as her words , for something more than ordinary .
Emma , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsaid the next moment ."
My mother ' s are really very good indeed .
The circumstance was told him at Hartfield ; for the moment , he was silent ; but Emma heard him almost immediately afterwards say to himself , over a newspaper he held in his hand , " Hum !
The truth of this representation there was no denying .
Perry .-- I want his directions no more than his drugs ."
Mr . Elton is good - humoured , cheerful , obliging , and gentle .
He had only himself to please in his choice : his fortune was his own ; for as to Frank , it was more than being tacitly brought up as his uncle ' s heir , it had become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume the name of Churchill on coming of age .
a man does not imagine any such thing .
Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first eight lines ."
" And do you see her , sir , tolerably often ?"
They were all disengaged and all happy .-- The preparatory interest of this dinner , however , was not yet over .
His visit he would now defer ; but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done and should be done .
Dr . Hughes I declare -- and Mrs . Hughes .
" Our amiable young man is a very weak young man , if this be the first occasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will of others .
" The old lady !
-- repeated Frank Churchill , with a look of surprize and displeasure .-- " That is easy -- but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it , I suppose ."
How do you do , Mr .
Time passed on .
It was felt as such things must be felt .
