" What does all that signify ?
With respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
dear -- I think you play the best of the two .
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing , but if he were criticising her behaviour , she did not feel afraid .
It was through a series of strange blunders !"
" Oh !
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper ' s room , or a bad butler ' s pantry , but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy , and that whenever he were attached , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment .
She was pleased , on taking leave , to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend her out of the room , to go with her even downstairs ; it gave her an opportunity which she immediately made use of , to say ,
I do not want the match -- I do not want to injure dear little Henry -- but the idea has been given me by circumstances ; and if Mr . Knightley really wished to marry , you would not have him refrain on Henry ' s account , a boy of six years old , who knows nothing of the matter ?"
They continued together with unabated regard however , till the marriage of Miss Campbell , who by that chance , that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs , giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior , engaged the affections of Mr . Dixon , a young man , rich and agreeable , almost as soon as they were acquainted ; and was eligibly and happily settled , while Jane Fairfax had yet her bread to earn .
CHAPTER XI
I do not wonder at you .
The misfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to your associates .
Emma wished to go to work directly , and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits , for not one of them had ever been finished , that they might decide together on the best size for Harriet .
We will follow them to Hartfield .
Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waited for dinner , he was talking to Miss Fairfax .
" No -- It will not be worth while .
.
Having arranged all these matters , looked them through , and put them all to rights , she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up for the demands of the two little boys , as well as of their grandpapa , when the great iron sweep - gate opened , and two persons entered whom she had never less expected to see together -- Frank Churchill , with Harriet leaning on his arm -- actually Harriet !-- A moment sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened .
I always regret excessively on dear Emma ' s account that she cannot be more at Highbury ; but now their daughter is married , I suppose Colonel and Mrs . Campbell will not be able to part with her at all .
" Part of my lace is gone ," said she , " and I do not know how I am to contrive .
It was hot ; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered , dispersed way , scarcely any three together , they insensibly followed one another to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes , which stretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the river , seemed the finish of the pleasure grounds .-- It led to nothing ; nothing but a view at the end over a low stone wall with high pillars , which seemed intended , in their erection , to give the appearance of an approach to the house , which never had been there .
I should not be helped so soon , but it smells most excellent , and I cannot help beginning ."
" Quite out of the question , quite out of the question ," he replied ;-- " but you must often wish it , I am sure ."
" No -- It will not be worth while .
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr . Weston .
But ( lowering her voice )-- nobody speaks except ourselves , and it is rather too much to be talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people ."
The fact is , I suppose , that she is tired of Enscombe .
" And when ," thought Emma , " will there be a beginning of Mr .
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
" Oh !
She desired nothing better herself .
But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma .
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else ; but you need not be afraid , they are very small , you see -- one of our small eggs will not hurt you .
" I hope he will be here to - morrow , for I have a question or two to ask him about myself of some consequence .
You will have no business here .-- Let it stay , however ,' said she ; ` give it houseroom till Colonel Campbell comes back .
Mr . Weston -- ( laughing affectedly ) I must protest against that .-- A most dangerous precedent indeed !-- I beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example .-- Upon my word , if this is what I am to expect , we married women must begin to exert ourselves !-- Oh !
" I was just going to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning .
" But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired , papa ?"
" You did behave very shamefully .
What blindness , what madness , had led her on !
Their affection was always to subside into friendship .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
You like Mr . Elton , papa ,-- I must look about for a wife for him .
She must be collected and calm .
Her second duty now , inferior only to her father ' s claims , was to promote Harriet ' s comfort , and endeavour to prove her own affection in some better method than by match - making .
Emma could not forgive her ;-- but as neither provocation nor resentment were discerned by Mr . Knightley , who had been of the party , and had seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side , he was expressing the next morning , being at Hartfield again on business with Mr . Woodhouse , his approbation of the whole ; not so openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room , but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma .
" I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr . Elton .
" By all means , if you can ."
He had been most agreeable , most delightful ; he had told Harriet that he had seen them go by , and had purposely followed them ; other little gallantries and allusions had been dropt , but nothing serious .
There was deep consciousness about him , and he found it easier to meet her eye than her friend ' s .
Pray take care , Miss Woodhouse , ours is rather a dark staircase -- rather darker and narrower than one could wish .
I hope he will be calling soon .
Time did not compose her .
replied he .
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
They must not do less than others , or she should be exposed to odious suspicions , and imagined capable of pitiful resentment .
She wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like Frank Churchill better .-- He seemed often observing her .
" My dear sir , upon no account in the world ; my father can direct me ."
How did you think the Coxes looked ?"
No !
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred the society of William Larkins .
no -- I would get you a better partner than myself .
Mr . Woodhouse was resigned .
What say you to Mr . Weston and Mr . Elton ?
But I am quite in the minority , I believe ; few people seem to value simplicity of dress ,-- show and finery are every thing .
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
The truth of this representation there was no denying .
" You are a very warm friend to Mr . Martin ; but , as I said before , are unjust to Harriet .
no , my love ; but you will soon be tired .
But I ought to have gone before .
They were permitted to go alone ; and with a cordial nod from one , and a graceful bow from the other , the two gentlemen took leave .
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is , that she seems to be sitting out of doors , with only a little shawl over her shoulders -- and it makes one think she must catch cold ."
" But , Harriet , is it necessary to burn the court - plaister ?-- I have not a word to say for the bit of old pencil , but the court - plaister might be useful ."
It did , however .-- Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of so sudden a journey , and his fears that Mr . Elton might never get safely to the end of it , and saw nothing extraordinary in his language .
" Brother and sister !
The thing would be for us all to come on donkeys , Jane , Miss Bates , and me -- and my caro sposo walking by .
Mrs . Weston wants to see you .
With some there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill ; others took it very composedly ; but there was a very general distress and disturbance on Miss Fairfax ' s disappearance being explained .
" Well -- as you please ; only don ' t have a great set out .
Is not it so ?"
Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove ."
A degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest me ; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other .
Emma ' s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the following day , by hearing that he was gone off to London , merely to have his hair cut .
" This is very true ," said she , " at least as far as relates to me , which was all that was meant -- and it is very shameful .-- Of the same age -- and always knowing her -- I ought to have been more her friend .-- She will never like me now .
She rose early , and wrote her letter to Harriet ; an employment which left her so very serious , so nearly sad , that Mr . Knightley , in walking up to Hartfield to breakfast , did not arrive at all too soon ; and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him , literally and figuratively , was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before .
The strength , resolution , and presence of mind of the Mr . Knightleys , commanded his fullest dependence .
She is reserved , more reserved , I think , than she used to be -- And I love an open temper .
You find me trying to be useful ; tell me if you think I shall succeed ."
" You are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
I merely called , because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs . Bates ; but I have been so pleasantly detained !
" I am ,"-- she answered --" I am fatigued ; but it is not the sort of fatigue -- quick walking will refresh me .-- Miss Woodhouse , we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits .
" What did Mr . Weston tell you ?"
-- said Emma , still perplexed .
Her aunt is a good creature , but , as a constant companion , must be very tiresome .
In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her .
When you have been here a little longer , Miss Fairfax , you will understand that Mr . Elton is the standard of perfection in Highbury , both in person and mind ."
Cole ."
" Miss Fairfax was not well enough to write ;" and when Mr . Perry called at Hartfield , the same morning , it appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited , though against her own consent , by himself , and that she was suffering under severe headaches , and a nervous fever to a degree , which made him doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs . Smallridge ' s at the time proposed .
Soon after this Miss Bates came in , and Emma could not help being diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself , resulting , she supposed , from doubt of what might be said , and impatience to say every thing .
