cried Emma ; " at that rate , what will become of her ?"
She should then have heard more : Mrs . Weston would speak to her , with a degree of unreserve which she would not hazard with Isabella ; and , she really believed , would scarcely try to conceal any thing relative to the Churchills from her , excepting those views on the young man , of which her own imagination had already given her such instinctive knowledge .
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
I assure you I have .
Stokes .-- Every body invited , was certainly to come ; Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight , which could not possibly be refused .
" I do not know , my dear .
He was gone immediately ; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss Fairfax , and talking to her ; but as to its effect on the young lady , as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them , exactly in front of Miss Fairfax , she could absolutely distinguish nothing .
In one point she was fully justified .
" And you must be off this very morning ?"
Every body is lazy !
" Yes --( rather hesitatingly )-- I believe I do ."
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin , it is impossible ; she has refused him , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application .
cried he .
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary , indeed , and that she had not a syllable to say for him .
" Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning ?-- Do , if it be possible .
Only my pattern gown is at Hartfield .
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the daily circle -- but that is not the change I had in view for you .
" It would be very hard , indeed , my dear , if poor Isabella were to be anywhere but at Hartfield ."
I certainly get better and better .-- Now for it ."
She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or two to Mrs . Goddard ' s , but it was then to be settled that she should return to Hartfield , to make a regular visit of some days .
" I thought you meant to go with me .
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account , than on Harriet ' s -- more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint .
What do you think of him ?
CHARADE .
" I know there is such an idea with many people , but indeed it is quite a mistake , sir .-- We all had our health perfectly well there , never found the least inconvenience from the mud ; and Mr . Wingfield says it is entirely a mistake to suppose the place unhealthy ; and I am sure he may be depended on , for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air , and his own brother and family have been there repeatedly ."
" I can answer for every thing of that nature , sir , because it will be under Mrs . Weston ' s care .
" No -- I have never seen Mr . Elton ," she replied , starting on this appeal ; " is he -- is he a tall man ?"
He was too angry to say another word ; her manner too decided to invite supplication ; and in this state of swelling resentment , and mutually deep mortification , they had to continue together a few minutes longer , for the fears of Mr . Woodhouse had confined them to a foot - pace .
She had reason to believe her nearly recovered from her cold , and it was desirable that she should have as much time as possible for getting the better of her other complaint before the gentleman ' s return .
" While her dear father lived , any change of condition must be impossible for her .
" Well ," said the still waiting Harriet ;--" well -- and -- and what shall I do ?"
."
Could I mention any thing more fit to be done , than to go to Mrs . Goddard ?
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
The Eltons were still talking of a visit from the Sucklings , and of the use to be made of their barouche - landau ; and Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother ' s ; and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed , and August , instead of Midsummer , fixed for it , she was likely to remain there full two months longer , provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs . Elton ' s activity in her service , and save herself from being hurried into a delightful situation against her will .
-- You always called me , ` Mr . Knightley ;' and , from habit , it has not so very formal a sound .-- And yet it is formal .
Well , ( returning to the room ,) I have not been able to succeed .
When she looked at the hedges , she thought the elder at least must soon be coming out ; and when she turned round to Harriet , she saw something like a look of spring , a tender smile even there .
" Middling , my dear ; I cannot compliment you .
with the help of spectacles .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
Ah !
Mr . Churchill ' s loss would be dreadful indeed .
Emma wondered on what , of all the medley , she would fix .
The weather does not look well , and grandmama will be uneasy .
No misfortune occurred , again to prevent the ball .
He had business at the Crown about his hay , and a great many errands for Mrs . Weston at Ford ' s , but he need not hurry any body else ."
Surprizes are foolish things .
if you had seen her , as I did , when she was at the worst !"
Elton ?"
" Not your vain spirit , but your serious spirit .-- If one leads you wrong , I am sure the other tells you of it ."
Her way was clear , though not quite smooth .-- She spoke then , on being so entreated .-- What did she say ?-- Just what she ought , of course .
Such another scheme , composed of so many ill - assorted people , she hoped never to be betrayed into again .
Emma was rather in dismay when only half a minute afterwards he began to speak of other things , and in a voice of the greatest alacrity and enjoyment .
" Elegant , agreeable manners , I was prepared for ," said he ; " but I confess that , considering every thing , I had not expected more than a very tolerably well - looking woman of a certain age ; I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs .
It was an unsuitable connexion , and did not produce much happiness .
Mr . Knightley , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant .-- Did you ever see such dancing ?-- Was not it delightful ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal to it ."
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened , and she were enabled to see that Mr . Elton was not the superior creature she had believed him .
" It is odd though ," observed his father , " that you should have had such a regular connected dream about people whom it was not very likely you should be thinking of at Enscombe .
I will bring friends with me ."
She was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully comprehended ; and then , being quite new , farther representations were necessary to make it acceptable .
He quitted the militia and engaged in trade , having brothers already established in a good way in London , which afforded him a favourable opening .
I had not the least idea !-- Jane took Mrs . Elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs . Smallridge ' s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .-- I did not know a word of it till it was all settled ."
CHAPTER XVII
I am thwarted in every thing material .
" Yes ," he replied , " any body may know how highly I think of her ."
And she , " Only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment , but she did think there were some looks a little like Mr .
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred .
She introduced him to her friend , Miss Smith , and , at convenient moments afterwards , heard what each thought of the other .
With the view of passing off an awkward moment , Emma smilingly said ,
Miss Bates , in her real anxiety for Jane , could hardly stay even to be grateful , before she stept forward and put an end to all farther singing .
He must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing .
" This is too bad ," cried Emma , as they turned away .
I do not know her , even by sight ."
Emma will be happy to entertain you .
I would have her understand me .
She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his clemency ; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in his opinion .
" I do not know .
You will know it all in time .
Call upon her , by all means ."
.
There was consciousness , animation , and warmth ; there was every thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted .-- She came forward with an offered hand ; and said , in a low , but very feeling tone ,
He had ridden home through the rain ; and had walked up directly after dinner , to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures , faultless in spite of all her faults , bore the discovery .
I have no objections at all to meeting the Hartfield family .
But I live out of the world , and am often astonished at what I hear .
In such a party , Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise ; but for the poor girl herself , it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her in such a state of unmerited punishment .
I was desired to say so from both .
But it would not do ; he had not come to the point .
I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else .
" Such an extraordinary dream of mine !"
Every moment had brought a fresh surprize ; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to her .-- How to understand it all !
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
" Yes , upon my word , very considerable .
Every body last night said how well you played ."
Dear Miss Woodhouse , how could you so mistake me ?"
Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles .
These were claims which he did not learn to overlook , though some years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax , before his own return to England put any thing in his power .
a considerable journey ."
The child of good fortune !
but he hoped he should in time ."
