" Mrs . Bates , let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs .
Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr . Weston ' s on the subject , as much as possible .
[ Emma by Jane Austen 1816 ]
A degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest me ; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other .
With respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
I planned the match from that hour ; and when such success has blessed me in this instance , dear papa , you cannot think that I shall leave off match - making ."
I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs . S . admits our apology , and is not offended .
You must grant me that ."
" No , I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell me ."
You will puff her up with such ideas of her own beauty , and of what she has a claim to , that , in a little while , nobody within her reach will be good enough for her .
Worse and worse .
" Oh !"
Grandmama was quite well , had a charming evening with Mr . Woodhouse , a vast deal of chat , and backgammon .-- Tea was made downstairs , biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came away : amazing luck in some of her throws : and she inquired a great deal about you , how you were amused , and who were your partners .
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy , and very communicative ; Jane would hardly eat any thing :-- Mr . Perry recommended nourishing food ; but every thing they could command ( and never had any body such good neighbours ) was distasteful .
Some people were always cross when they were hot .
Selina , who is mild almost to a fault , bore with them much better ."
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is , that she seems to be sitting out of doors , with only a little shawl over her shoulders -- and it makes one think she must catch cold ."
" I see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention .
" Depend upon it , Mrs . Churchill does every thing that any other fine lady ever did .
But you , who have known Miss Fairfax from a child , must be a better judge of her character , and of how she is likely to conduct herself in critical situations , than I can be ."
We seemed to understand each other .
He has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart ."
In one point she was fully justified .
You must promise me not to sit up ."
As the sun is out , I believe I had better take my three turns while I can .
Of all the sources of evil surrounding the former , since her coming to Highbury , she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst .
I should not have used the expression .
And I see very few pearls in the room except mine .-- So Frank Churchill is a capital dancer , I understand .-- We shall see if our styles suit .-- A fine young man certainly is Frank Churchill .
I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did , but something or other hindered me all the morning ; first one thing , then another , there is no saying what , you know .
In this style she ran on ; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till Mr . Woodhouse came into the room ; her vanity had then a change of object , and Emma heard her saying in the same half - whisper to Jane ,
They met with the utmost friendliness .
yes ; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to Highbury .
" Here is April come !"
Do not distress her ."
And here I can admit , that my manners to Miss W ., in being unpleasant to Miss F ., were highly blameable .
" I am to hear from him soon ," continued Mrs . Weston .
" Why will not you write one yourself for us , Mr .
My dear Isabella , I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr . Perry yet ; and he never forgets you ."
" But you , who are so extremely fond of it -- there can be no danger , surely ?"
I had no intention , I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes , when I first entered the house .
Being pretty well aware of what sort of joy you must both be feeling , I have been in no hurry with my congratulations ; but I hope it all went off tolerably well .
The dread of such a failure after all became the prominent uneasiness ; and when Harriet appeared , and in very good spirits , and without having any such reason to give for her long absence , she felt a satisfaction which settled her with her own mind , and convinced her , that let Mr . Knightley think or say what he would , she had done nothing which woman ' s friendship and woman ' s feelings would not justify .
How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had been a continual impediment -- less acknowledged by Mr . Weston than by herself -- but even he had never been able to finish the subject better than by saying --" Those matters will take care of themselves ; the young people will find a way ."
" I do remember it ," cried Emma ; " I perfectly remember it .-- Talking about spruce - beer .-- Oh !
poor fellow !-- sad business for him .-- She was extremely concerned ; for , though very eccentric , he had a thousand good qualities .-- How could he be so taken in ?-- Did not think him at all in love -- not in the least .-- Poor Knightley !-- There would be an end of all pleasant intercourse with him .-- How happy he had been to come and dine with them whenever they asked him !
My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings , Lords of the earth !
Such a sad loss to our party to - day !"
He was so much displeased , that it was longer than usual before he came to Hartfield again ; and when they did meet , his grave looks shewed that she was not forgiven .
Emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ; that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ; and that Mr . Knightley certainly had not done him justice .
I have no faith in Mrs . Elton ' s acknowledging herself the inferior in thought , word , or deed ; or in her being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good - breeding .
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable .
The clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall .
The information was , as you state , that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins .
I know you will soon call on her ; she is living in dread of the visit .
She had no scruple with regard to him .
No , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond - street till just before he mounts his horse to - morrow .
" And no great harm if it does ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
" Well ," said Emma , " I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the idea , and I wish them very happy .
The " How d ' ye do ' s " were quiet and constrained on each side .
Her congratulations were warm and open ; but Emma could not speak so fluently .
" To be sure !"
He must have a pretty good opinion of himself ."
Delightful , charming , superior , first circles , spheres , lines , ranks , every thing -- and Mrs . Elton was wild to have the offer closed with immediately .-- On her side , all was warmth , energy , and triumph -- and she positively refused to take her friend ' s negative , though Miss Fairfax continued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing , repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before .-- Still Mrs . Elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescence by the morrow ' s post .-- How Jane could bear it at all , was astonishing to Emma .-- She did look vexed , she did speak pointedly -- and at last , with a decision of action unusual to her , proposed a removal .-- " Should not they walk ?
That she was not immediately ready , Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power of performance ; and Emma could not but pity such feelings , whatever their origin , and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again .
" Dirty , sir !
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at Hartfield , which made their presence so acceptable ; for though her first remark , on reading it , was that " of course it must be declined ," she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do , that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful .
I had not the least idea !-- Jane took Mrs . Elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs . Smallridge ' s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .-- I did not know a word of it till it was all settled ."
cried he .
it was such an inexpressible obligation !-- The very recollection of it , and all that I felt at the time -- when I saw him coming -- his noble look -- and my wretchedness before .
So I said I would go down and see , and Jane said , ` Shall I go down instead ?
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
It was not with Mrs . Suckling , it was not with Mrs . Bragge , but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them : it was with a cousin of Mrs . Bragge , an acquaintance of Mrs . Suckling , a lady known at Maple Grove .
Yes , I understand the sort of mind .
Mrs . Weston was acting no part , feigning no feelings in all that she said to him in favour of the event .-- She had been extremely surprized , never more so , than when Emma first opened the affair to her ; but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all , and had no scruple in urging him to the utmost .-- She had such a regard for Mr . Knightley , as to think he deserved even her dearest Emma ; and it was in every respect so proper , suitable , and unexceptionable a connexion , and in one respect , one point of the highest importance , so peculiarly eligible , so singularly fortunate , that now it seemed as if Emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature , and that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it , and wished it long ago .-- How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emma would have renounced their own home for Hartfield !
And he was really a very pleasing young man , a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like .
I am sure Miss Nash would -- for Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married , and it is only a linen - draper ."
-- but checking himself --" No , no , I understand you -- forgive me -- I am pleased that you can say even so much .-- He is no object of regret , indeed !
In a country life I conceive it to be a sort of necessary ; for , let a woman have ever so many resources , it is not possible for her to be always shut up at home ;-- and very long walks , you know -- in summer there is dust , and in winter there is dirt ."
Should she proceed no farther ?-- should she let it pass , and seem to suspect nothing ?-- Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did ; or perhaps if she were totally silent , it might only drive Harriet into asking her to hear too much ; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been , such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances , she was perfectly resolved .-- She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once , all that she meant to say and know .
CHAPTER XII
" Do you ?-- I have no doubt .
I hope you are quite well .
" What is this ?-- What is this ?"
" We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage , my dear Emma -- but it is better than being always at home .
Soon afterwards he began again ,
There was no denying that those brothers had penetration .
I am quite enough in love .
Mrs . Churchill , after being disliked at least twenty - five years , was now spoken of with compassionate allowances .
" What do you say to Mrs .
She is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom , with probably no settled provision at all , and certainly no respectable relations .
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol -- merchant , of course , he must be called ; but , as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate , it was not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also .
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
_We_ must begin ; we must go and pay wedding visit very soon ."
Once , I felt the fire rather too much ; but then I moved back my chair a little , a very little , and it did not disturb me .
-- Emma had promised ; but still Harriet must be excepted .
Miss Hawkins ,-- I dare say , an excellent young woman .
She meant to take her in the carriage , leave her at the Abbey Mill , while she drove a little farther , and call for her again so soon , as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past , and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for the future .
Emma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet ' s fancy a proper direction and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose , for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr . Elton ' s being a remarkably handsome man , with most agreeable manners ; and as she had no hesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints , she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet ' s side , as there could be any occasion for .
She was your governess , I think ?"
How much worse , had they been obliged to meet !
