" Him !-- never , never .
There will be but one subject throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury ; but one interest -- one object of curiosity ; it will be all Mr . Frank Churchill ; we shall think and speak of nobody else ."
No sacrifice on any side worth the name .
You see how delightfully she writes .
" Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully employed ," cried Emma .
leave all that to me .
At present , I ask only to hear , once to hear your voice ."
My dear Emma , I am longing to talk to you .
She could not be too soon alarmed , nor send for Perry too often .
" Certainly .
This little explanation with Mr . Knightley gave Emma considerable pleasure .
Her many beginnings were displayed .
" He had been so fortunate as to -- I forget the precise words -- one has no business to remember them .
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so ; but it was not immediately in her power .
I know what worthy people they are .
You really are a very sad girl , and do not know how to take care of yourself .-- To the post - office indeed !
Emma ' s eyes were instantly withdrawn ; and she sat silently meditating , in a fixed attitude , for a few minutes .
She could not enter the house again , could not be in the same room to which she had with such vain artifice retreated three months ago , to lace up her boot , without _recollecting_ .
The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr . Elton to Mr . Woodhouse , a long , civil , ceremonious note , to say , with Mr . Elton ' s best compliments , " that he was proposing to leave Highbury the following morning in his way to Bath ; where , in compliance with the pressing entreaties of some friends , he had engaged to spend a few weeks , and very much regretted the impossibility he was under , from various circumstances of weather and business , of taking a personal leave of Mr . Woodhouse , of whose friendly civilities he should ever retain a grateful sense -- and had Mr . Woodhouse any commands , should be happy to attend to them ."
" No , I do not know that Mr . Wingfield considers it _very_ sickly except --
" Ever hear her !"
Emma restrained her indignation , and only turned from her in silence .
" Exactly so -- The shape of the eye and the lines about the mouth -- I have not a doubt of your success .
Yes , next week .
" Ah !
She had heard and seen it all ; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wet walk of this morning had produced any .
Well , Mr . Knightley , and so you actually saw the letter ; well --"
Harriet was silent .
He perfectly knew his own meaning ; and having warmly protested against her suspicion as most injurious , and slightly touched upon his respect for Miss Smith as her friend ,-- but acknowledging his wonder that Miss Smith should be mentioned at all ,-- he resumed the subject of his own passion , and was very urgent for a favourable answer .
What are Harriet Smith ' s claims , either of birth , nature or education , to any connexion higher than Robert Martin ?
" That has been a good deal the case , my dear ; but not to the degree you mention .
He came back gay and self - satisfied , eager and busy , caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse , and defying Miss Smith .
and very much to the purpose .
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
cried Emma ; " at that rate , what will become of her ?"
Short had been the notice -- short their meeting ; he was gone ; and Emma felt so sorry to part , and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry , and feeling it too much .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
As she thought less of his inebriety , she thought more of his inconstancy and presumption ; and with fewer struggles for politeness , replied ,
Warmth and tenderness of heart , with an affectionate , open manner , will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction , I am sure it will .
I made the match , you know , four years ago ; and to have it take place , and be proved in the right , when so many people said Mr . Weston would never marry again , may comfort me for any thing ."
Every body seemed happy ; and the praise of being a delightful ball , which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be , was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this .
She had been satisfied to hear and believe just what Mrs . Goddard chose to tell her ; and looked no farther .
Now there would be pleasure in her returning -- Every thing would be a pleasure .
No , you shall send it to Hartfield , if you please .
He came four times a day for a week .
They will be so near their own stable ."
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
If Mr . Knightley did not begin seriously , he was obliged to proceed so , for his proposal was caught at with delight ; and the " Oh !
" Oh !"
--
" Whenever the time may come , it must be unwelcome to her and all her friends -- but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is possible -- I mean , as to the character and manners of the family ."
It was horrible to Emma to think how it must sink him in the general opinion , to foresee the smiles , the sneers , the merriment it would prompt at his expense ; the mortification and disdain of his brother , the thousand inconveniences to himself .-- Could it be ?-- No ; it was impossible .
But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading from Emma .
She gave a slight glance round the table , and applied herself to it .
My dear Harriet , what are you thinking of ?
She saw it all ; and entering into her feelings , promoted her quitting the house immediately , and watched her safely off with the zeal of a friend .
No , he could not believe it a bad house ; not such a house as a man was to be pitied for having .
Where I have a regard , I always think a person well - looking .
If I draw less , I shall read more ; if I give up music , I shall take to carpet - work .
She often says , when the letter is first opened , ` Well , Hetty , now I think you will be put to it to make out all that checker - work '-- don ' t you , ma ' am ?-- And then I tell her , I am sure she would contrive to make it out herself , if she had nobody to do it for her -- every word of it -- I am sure she would pore over it till she had made out every word .
Frank ' s was the first idea ; and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ; for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties , and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance .
( turning to Emma .)
" You think so , do you ?-- I wanted the opinion of some one who could really judge .
" Jane caught a bad cold , poor thing !
Oh !
There was one , however , which Emma thought something of .-- The two last dances before supper were begun , and Harriet had no partner ;-- the only young lady sitting down ;-- and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers , that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder !-- But Emma ' s wonder lessened soon afterwards , on seeing Mr . Elton sauntering about .
And as to my dear little boys , I must say , that if Aunt Emma has not time for them , I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley , who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one -- and who , when he is at home , is either reading to himself or settling his accounts ."
It would hold the very number for comfort .
I could never hope to equal my own doings at Randalls .
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself .
" My dear papa , I sent the whole hind - quarter .
And ( raising his voice still more ) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too .
Such was his own account at Randall ' s .
" I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful and troublesome ."
" I do not say it is so ; but you will do well to consider whether it is so or not , and to regulate your behaviour accordingly .
" Oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never pleasing .
The only way of proving it , however , will be to turn to our maps .
said I , ` it is Miss Woodhouse : I am sure you will like to see her .'
Now there would be pleasure in her returning -- Every thing would be a pleasure .
" I am here on no business of my own ," said Emma ; " I am only waiting for my friend .
_There_ , indeed , lay real pleasure , for there she was giving up the sweetest hours of the twenty - four to his comfort ; and feeling that , unmerited as might be the degree of his fond affection and confiding esteem , she could not , in her general conduct , be open to any severe reproach .
However , this does make a difference ; and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over -- but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration .
She heard Miss Bates ' s voice , something was to be done in a hurry ; the maid looked frightened and awkward ; hoped she would be pleased to wait a moment , and then ushered her in too soon .
Emma was most sincerely interested .
Certainly she had often , especially of late , thought his manners to herself unnecessarily gallant ; but it had passed as his way , as a mere error of judgment , of knowledge , of taste , as one proof among others that he had not always lived in the best society , that with all the gentleness of his address , true elegance was sometimes wanting ; but , till this very day , she had never , for an instant , suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respect to her as Harriet ' s friend .
At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchen chimney wanted sweeping .
Harriet , she found , had never in her life been within side the Vicarage , and her curiosity to see it was so extreme , that , considering exteriors and probabilities , Emma could only class it , as a proof of love , with Mr . Elton ' s seeing ready wit in her .
" I do not offer it for Miss Smith ' s collection ," said he .
Emma thought first of herself , and then of Harriet .
" My being charming , Harriet , is not quite enough to induce me to marry ; I must find other people charming -- one other person at least .
Mr . Elton was called out of the room before tea , old John Abdy ' s son wanted to speak with him .
" Well , he is coming , you see ; good news , I think .
A very few minutes more , however , completed the present trial .
" Aye , _that_ may suit your humble ideas of yourself ;-- I know what a modest creature you are ; but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking up with any thing that may offer , any inferior , commonplace situation , in a family not moving in a certain circle , or able to command the elegancies of life ."
I always deserve the best treatment , because I never put up with any other ; and , therefore , you must give me a plain , direct answer .
Better be without sense , than misapply it as you do ."
Would not Harriet be the very creature described ?
In two minutes , however , he relented in his own favour ; and muttering something about spruce - beer , walked off .
She had not been able to speak ; and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome -- then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ; but it was just too late .
Let me entreat you to run no risks .
