He was satisfied of there being no present danger in returning home , but no assurances could convince him that it was safe to stay ; and while the others were variously urging and recommending , Mr . Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences : thus --
A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole .
Harriet smiled again , and her smiles grew stronger .
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
" I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming , if he made a point of it .
" Ah !
" You have , I believe , and know the whole ."
I Always take the part of my own sex .
Emma saw how Mr . Weston understood these joyous prospects .
And to propose that she and I should unite to form a musical club !
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !-- I believe we drive faster than any body .-- What a pleasure it is to send one ' s carriage for a friend !-- I understand you were so kind as to offer , but another time it will be quite unnecessary .
He does not think of the draught .
Exquisite , quite exquisite !-- Still , however , having proceeded so far , one is unwilling to give the matter up .
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol -- merchant , of course , he must be called ; but , as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate , it was not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also .
" You are not quite so miserable , though , as when you first came .
But why must she consent to be with the Eltons ?-- Here is quite a separate puzzle ."
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End .
The chances are that she must be a gainer ."
At present , there was nothing to be done for Harriet ; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible on Emma ' s side .
" And I am sure I should never want to go there ; for I am never happy but at Hartfield ."
I am sure I had much rather hear you .
She must wait a moment , or he would think her mad .
Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment .
She would not be in a hurry to find fault , but she suspected that there was no elegance ;-- ease , but not elegance .-- She was almost sure that for a young woman , a stranger , a bride , there was too much ease .
Her eyes were towards Donwell as she walked , but she saw him not .
I never met with her equal .
Indeed you should take care of yourself as well as of your friend .
She then broke the lace off short , and dexterously throwing it into a ditch , was presently obliged to entreat them to stop , and acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort .
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs . Elton , and when Mrs . Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it !
She could never quit him ."
" And here is Mrs . Weston and Mr . Frank Churchill too !-- Quite delightful ; so many friends !"
" I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield ," said he , at the conclusion .
She was not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness ; and with this resemblance of her father , she inherited also much of his constitution ; was delicate in her own health , over - careful of that of her children , had many fears and many nerves , and was as fond of her own Mr . Wingfield in town as her father could be of Mr . Perry .
After an interval of some minutes , however , he began with ,
I think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer , and take their tea with us -- take us in their afternoon walk ; which they might do , as our hours are so reasonable , and yet get home without being out in the damp of the evening .
said Mr . Weston .
She was all pleasure and gratitude , both for Harriet and herself , and longed to be thanking him ; and though too distant for speech , her countenance said much , as soon as she could catch his eye again .
Till they all come in I shall not be missed ; and when they do , will you have the goodness to say that I am gone ?"
He understood what would be welcome ; he could be sure of little else .
Perry ."
Mrs . Weston was acting no part , feigning no feelings in all that she said to him in favour of the event .-- She had been extremely surprized , never more so , than when Emma first opened the affair to her ; but she saw in it only increase of happiness to all , and had no scruple in urging him to the utmost .-- She had such a regard for Mr . Knightley , as to think he deserved even her dearest Emma ; and it was in every respect so proper , suitable , and unexceptionable a connexion , and in one respect , one point of the highest importance , so peculiarly eligible , so singularly fortunate , that now it seemed as if Emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature , and that she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it , and wished it long ago .-- How very few of those men in a rank of life to address Emma would have renounced their own home for Hartfield !
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort , while Mrs . Weston , of a more apprehensive disposition , foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays ; and after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer , suffered a great deal more herself .
His letters disgust me ."
Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday , and spoke of it as for Saturday ."
They all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they were just growing again like themselves , ( Harriet , as Emma must suspect , as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy ,) when the carriage reappeared , and all was over .
Stokes .-- Every body invited , was certainly to come ; Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying a few days beyond his fortnight , which could not possibly be refused .
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
my dear , it is not like Hartfield .
I will tell you exactly what I think ."
A little upstart , vulgar being , with her Mr . E ., and her _caro_ _sposo_ , and her resources , and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery .
" No ,"-- he calmly replied ,--" there is but one married woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell , and that one is --"
" I had .
Emma wished to go to work directly , and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits , for not one of them had ever been finished , that they might decide together on the best size for Harriet .
Mr . Elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
Harriet had business at Ford ' s .-- Emma thought it most prudent to go with her .
" He knew nothing about it , Emma .
Mr . Perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr . Woodhouse ' s life ; and upon being applied to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless taken moderately .
You knew I should not stir till my lord and master appeared .-- Here have I been sitting this hour , giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience -- for who can say , you know , how soon it may be wanted ?"
It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble .
WINDSOR - JULY .
" But will there be good room for five couple ?-- I really do not think there will ."
I should not have used the expression .
We know , on the contrary , that he has so much of both , that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts in the kingdom .
Except the Sucklings and Bragges , there is not such another nursery establishment , so liberal and elegant , in all Mrs . Elton ' s acquaintance .
She felt as if the spring would not pass without bringing a crisis , an event , a something to alter her present composed and tranquil state .
While she was gone , Mr . Knightley called , and sat some time with Mr . Woodhouse and Emma , till Mr . Woodhouse , who had previously made up his mind to walk out , was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it , and was induced by the entreaties of both , though against the scruples of his own civility , to leave Mr . Knightley for that purpose .
They spoke , therefore , of Mrs . Churchill ' s death with mutual forbearance .
Woodhouse ?-- I am so glad to hear such a good account .
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess , who had fallen little short of a mother in affection .
You never wrote a truer line ."
" You do quite right ," said she ;--" we will make your apologies to Mr . and Mrs .
Nobody had any information to give ; and , after a few more wonderings , Emma said ,
He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do .
Who makes you their confidant ?"
And he is a very clever boy , indeed .
He did really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment .
Does not she , Jane ?-- Do not we often talk of Mr . Frank Churchill ?-- Ah !
" Oftentimes very convenient , no doubt , but never pleasing .
I am making a conundrum .
CHAPTER VIII
Perry tells me that Mr . Cole never touches malt liquor .
Mrs . Cole had many to agree with her ; every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell , and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made ; and there were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way , and still listen to Mrs . Cole .
Your views for Harriet are best known to yourself ; but as you make no secret of your love of match - making , it is fair to suppose that views , and plans , and projects you have ;-- and as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man , I think it will be all labour in vain ."
brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of private liking , of private understanding even , between Frank Churchill and Jane .
You will excuse her not coming to you -- she is not able -- she is gone into her own room -- I want her to lie down upon the bed .
I have a right to talk on such subjects , without being suspected of introducing Robert Martin ."
" One more ;-- they would not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account , and would only ask for one more ."
Mr . Weston ' s own happiness was indisputable .
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself ; and if Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield , the heiress of thirty thousand pounds , were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied , he would soon try for Miss Somebody else with twenty , or with ten .
Mr . Elton looked all alarm on the occasion , as he exclaimed ,
" Will he , indeed ?
She must tell you herself what she is -- yet not by word , for never was there a human creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit .-- Since I began this letter , which will be longer than I foresaw , I have heard from her .-- She gives a good account of her own health ; but as she never complains , I dare not depend .
It was being very deficient ."
I met her frequently at Weymouth .
I dare say they often think of you , and wonder which will be the day , the precise day of the instrument ' s coming to hand .
A warm climate may be prescribed for her .
Mr . Woodhouse talked over his alarms , and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude .
" You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed to come to you at such a time .
There go you and your riddle - book one of these days ."
It was no longer in Emma ' s power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures .
