Miss Woodhouse , how ungrateful I have been !"
" And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while ; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure ."
These were charming feelings -- but not lasting .
" But , Mr . Knightley , she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor , and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for ."
For a moment he was silent ; and then added , in a tone much more guarded and demure ,
" Oh !
Going in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ;-- four horses and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle , shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had at home ."
He has passed you very often ."
He shook his head ; but there was a smile of indulgence with it , and he only said ,
She heard him sigh .
A man must be very much in love , indeed , to describe her so .
She was short , plump , and fair , with a fine bloom , blue eyes , light hair , regular features , and a look of great sweetness , and , before the end of the evening , Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person , and quite determined to continue the acquaintance .
Emma shall be an angel , and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella .
But the sight of Mr . Knightley among the most attentive , soon drew away half Emma ' s mind ; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs . Weston ' s suspicions , to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions .
I believe it is the only way that Mr . Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome .
On his side were the inquiries ,--" Was she a horsewoman ?-- Pleasant rides ?-- Pleasant walks ?-- Had they a large neighbourhood ?-- Highbury , perhaps , afforded society enough ?-- There were several very pretty houses in and about it .-- Balls -- had they balls ?-- Was it a musical society ?"
Such expressions , assisted as they were by every thing that look and manner could do , made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so well , nor valued her affection so highly before .
He is half way to Windsor by this time ."
" Nonsense !
" It is so , indeed ," continued Mr . Knightley ; " I have it from Robert Martin himself .
This does not seem much like joy , indeed , in me --( twinkling away a tear or two )-- but it will be very trying for us to part with her , after having had her so long , and she has a dreadful headache just now , writing all the morning :-- such long letters , you know , to be written to Colonel Campbell , and Mrs . Dixon .
Of all houses in the kingdom Mrs . Bragge ' s is the one I would most wish to see you in ."
But soon it came to be on one side ,
She had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchill talked of ; and , for his sake , greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr . and Mrs . Weston ; she was very often thinking of him , and quite impatient for a letter , that she might know how he was , how were his spirits , how was his aunt , and what was the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring .
The affection of the whole family , the warm attachment of Miss Campbell in particular , was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance of Jane ' s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements .
Emma laughed , and replied : " But I had the assistance of all your endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people .
my mother ' s spectacles .
As Harriet described it , there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour .
" I never should have presumed to think of it at first ," said she , " but for you .
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
She frequently gave me hints of it .
She continued to look back , but in vain ; and soon , with what appeared unusual speed , they were half way down the hill , and every thing left far behind .
There was no recovering Miss Taylor -- nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity her ; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr . Woodhouse .
" Proof indeed !"
And I will own to you , ( I am sure it will be safe ), that so far as our living with Mr . Churchill at Enscombe , it is settled .
Mrs . Weston added , " that he could only allow himself time to hurry to Highbury , after breakfast , and take leave of the few friends there whom he could suppose to feel any interest in him ; and that he might be expected at Hartfield very soon ."
" Oh !
Jane declined it , however , and the husband and wife walked off .
And now to chuse the mortification of Mrs . Elton ' s notice and the penury of her conversation , rather than return to the superior companions who have always loved her with such real , generous affection ."
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
But she was not wanted to speak .
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she felt too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely kept at a distance ; but by the others , the subject was almost immediately introduced , and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations were received , the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of " my excellent friend Colonel Campbell ."
You must answer it of course -- and speedily ."
I want you to call me something else , but I do not know what ."
She says she is afraid there will be draughts in the passage , though every thing has been done -- One door nailed up -- Quantities of matting -- My dear Jane , indeed you must .
Only one page more .
But while so many were devoting him to Emma , and Emma herself making him over to Harriet , Mr . Knightley began to suspect him of some inclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax .
had it , by any blessed felicity , occurred to her , to institute the comparison .-- She saw that there never had been a time when she did not consider Mr . Knightley as infinitely the superior , or when his regard for her had not been infinitely the most dear .
I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can ."
If she has fancied otherwise , her own wishes have misled her , and I am very sorry -- extremely sorry -- But , Miss Smith , indeed !-- Oh !
" This was settled last night , and Frank was off with the light this morning .
By birth she belonged to Highbury : and when at three years old , on losing her mother , she became the property , the charge , the consolation , the fondling of her grandmother and aunt , there had seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there ; of her being taught only what very limited means could command , and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement , to be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person , good understanding , and warm - hearted , well - meaning relations .
" For shame , Emma !
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience , and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding .
I saw Jane Fairfax and conversed with her , with admiration and pleasure always -- but with no thought beyond ."
" The joke ," he replied gravely , " seemed confined to you and Mr .
However , this does make a difference ; and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over -- but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration .
" Here ," resumed Harriet , turning to her box again , " here is something still more valuable , I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable , because this is what did really once belong to him , which the court - plaister never did ."
An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack , and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison .
Harriet was too much agitated to encounter him .
The manner , perhaps , may have as little to recommend them .
" Ah !
He was in high spirits ; as ready to talk and laugh as ever , and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit , and recur to old stories : and he was not without agitation .
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto .
Half a dozen natural children , perhaps -- and poor Frank cut off !-- This , though very undesirable , would be no matter of agony to her .
Is not that your idea ?"
" He is very plain , undoubtedly -- remarkably plain :-- but that is nothing compared with his entire want of gentility .
Emma returned her friend ' s pressure with interest ; and was pleased enough to exclaim ,
" From the very circumstance of its being larger , sir .
Harriet , Harriet , do not deceive yourself ; do not be run away with by gratitude and compassion .
The word was discovered , and with a faint smile pushed away .
Harriet had business at Ford ' s .-- Emma thought it most prudent to go with her .
I do admire your patriotism .
" It would be a crowd -- a sad crowd ; and what could be worse than dancing without space to turn in ?"
" I shall never let that book go out of my own hands ," said she .
Mr . Cole said how much taste you had ; and Mr . Frank Churchill talked a great deal about your taste , and that he valued taste much more than execution ."
Angry as she was , the thought of the moment made her resolve to restrain herself when she did speak .
" Not Harriet ' s equal !"
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
I think Mr . John Knightley very far from looking well ."
What is passable in youth is detestable in later age .
So I said I would go down and see , and Jane said , ` Shall I go down instead ?
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
Cannot you imagine , Mr . Knightley , what a _sensation_ his coming will produce ?
Harriet was a little distressed -- did look a little foolish at first : but having once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly , and self - deceived , before , her pain and confusion seemed to die away with the words , and leave her without a care for the past , and with the fullest exultation in the present and future ; for , as to her friend ' s approbation , Emma had instantly removed every fear of that nature , by meeting her with the most unqualified congratulations .-- Harriet was most happy to give every particular of the evening at Astley ' s , and the dinner the next day ; she could dwell on it all with the utmost delight .
Mr . Knightley , who had nothing of ceremony about him , was offering by his short , decided answers , an amusing contrast to the protracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other .
The word was _blunder_ ; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it , there was a blush on Jane ' s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwise ostensible .
I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself , and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them ."
My friend Robert could not resist .
" You are very obliging .-- Frank will be extremely happy , I am sure .-- He is to be in town next week , if not sooner .
" I shall be happier to burn it ," replied Harriet .
Our part of London is very superior to most others !-- You must not confound us with London in general , my dear sir .
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
You will not like the noise ."
But what can be the matter ?-- Is she really not ill ?"
It was a pity , perhaps , that he had not come last night ; for , though the child seemed well now , very well considering , it would probably have been better if Perry had seen it ."
I could not have believed it !
" I will say no more about him ," cried Emma , " you turn every thing to evil .
yes ; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to Highbury .
