To talk would be only to irritate .-- She wrote to her , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to Hartfield ; acknowledging it to be her conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of _one_ topic had better be avoided ; and hoping , that if a few days were allowed to pass before they met again , except in the company of others -- she objected only to a tete - a - tete -- they might be able to act as if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday .-- Harriet submitted , and approved , and was grateful .
What a pity it is that Mr . Weston ever thought of her !"
" My dear Jane , say no more about it .
A young _woman_ , if she fall into bad hands , may be teazed , and kept at a distance from those she wants to be with ; but one cannot comprehend a young _man_ ' s being under such restraint , as not to be able to spend a week with his father , if he likes it ."
no , no , Henry must have Donwell .
One man ' s style must not be the rule of another ' s .
While you were in the smallest degree wavering , I said nothing about it , because I would not influence ; but it would have been the loss of a friend to me .
" A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance , to be married to a respectable , intelligent gentleman - farmer !"
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane , a lane leading at right angles from the broad , though irregular , main street of the place ; and , as may be inferred , containing the blessed abode of Mr . Elton .
" You have some news to hear , now you are come back , that will rather surprize you ."
You shall have a charming wife ."
It was Garrick ' s , you know ."
" You speak as if you envied him ."
" You may well be amazed ," returned Mrs . Weston , still averting her eyes , and talking on with eagerness , that Emma might have time to recover -- " You may well be amazed .
Even Emma grew tired at last of flattery and merriment , and wished herself rather walking quietly about with any of the others , or sitting almost alone , and quite unattended to , in tranquil observation of the beautiful views beneath her .
I shall not discuss it here .
" You are quite in the right ; it was most natural to pay your visit , then "--
" We are going to Box Hill to - morrow ;-- you will join us .
She could have made an inquiry or two , as to the expedition and the expense of the Irish mails ;-- it was at her tongue ' s end -- but she abstained .
" We thought you were to bring them ."
a word to the wise .-- I am in a fine flow of spirits , an ' t I ?
" This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted , and Mr . Weston has done very well for himself ; but he must have knocked up every body else .
" Has your son been with you , then ?"
" Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith !-- Very goodnatured , I declare ."
I wanted to keep it from Jane ' s knowledge ; but , unluckily , I had mentioned it before I was aware ."
" And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a lucky guess ?-- I pity you .-- I thought you cleverer -- for , depend upon it a lucky guess is never merely luck .
They were now approaching the cottage , and all idle topics were superseded .
" But really , I am half ashamed , and wish I had never taken up the idea ."
But do not imagine that I want to influence you ."
This discovery laid many smaller matters open .
I am a great dreamer .
As the blow was given , Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than in listening ; and Harriet , unchecked , ran eagerly through what she had to tell .
But I do not like the corner into Vicarage Lane ."
It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple - minded and ignorant ; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of being humble and discreet , and repressing imagination all the rest of her life .
" _His_ sufferings ," replied Emma dryly , " do not appear to have done him much harm .
" Quite wrong , my dear aunt ; there is no likeness at all ."
I believe it is the only way that Mr . Woodhouse thinks the fruit thoroughly wholesome .
Emma only nodded , and smiled .-- After a little thinking , and a very tender sigh , he added ,
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be -- for we do not at all affect to equal my brother , Mr . Suckling , in income .-- However , my resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax .-- I shall certainly have her very often at my house , shall introduce her wherever I can , shall have musical parties to draw out her talents , and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation .
Emma said it would be awkward ; Mrs . Weston was in distress about the supper ; and Mr . Woodhouse opposed it earnestly , on the score of health .
A boyish scheme , indeed !-- I cannot comprehend a man ' s wishing to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would rather dispense with ; and he did know that she would have prevented the instrument ' s coming if she could ."
It is always the lady ' s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance .
It would be the greatest pleasure to them , if you could allow me to attend you there .
Every possibility of good was before me , and the first of blessings secured , in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence .
" I am going to Kingston .
" Pray , Mr . Knightley ," said Emma , who had been smiling to herself through a great part of this speech , " how do you know that Mr . Martin did not speak yesterday ?"
" Well done , Mrs .
You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles , I am sure , sir ; friendly , good sort of people as ever lived , and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years ."
Pardon me -- but you will be limited as to number -- only three at once ."
But we never did .
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it ."
" There is no saying , indeed ," replied Harriet rather solemnly .
She considered -- resolved -- and , trying to smile , began --
Might not the evening end in a dance ?
She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home .
and I am sure our thanks are due to you , Mrs . Weston , on that score .
It is fit that the fortune should be on his side , for I think the merit will be all on hers ."
You did not enjoy them as I did ; you appeared tired the whole time .
Harriet , tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word , was always very long at a purchase ; and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing her mind , Emma went to the door for amusement .-- Much could not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury ;-- Mr . Perry walking hastily by , Mr . William Cox letting himself in at the office - door , Mr . Cole ' s carriage - horses returning from exercise , or a stray letter - boy on an obstinate mule , were the liveliest objects she could presume to expect ; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray , a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her full basket , two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone , and a string of dawdling children round the baker ' s little bow - window eyeing the gingerbread , she knew she had no reason to complain , and was amused enough ; quite enough still to stand at the door .
With a little reserve of manner , Emma continued :
It was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as herself to avoid a meeting .
Yet she could not bear this silence .
Mr . Elton knows you ."
Till this year , every long vacation since their marriage had been divided between Hartfield and Donwell Abbey ; but all the holidays of this autumn had been given to sea - bathing for the children , and it was therefore many months since they had been seen in a regular way by their Surry connexions , or seen at all by Mr . Woodhouse , who could not be induced to get so far as London , even for poor Isabella ' s sake ; and who consequently was now most nervously and apprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit .
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
She will be disagreeable in infancy , and correct herself as she grows older .
Weston .-- So it proved ;-- for when happily released from Mr . Elton , and seated by Mr . Weston , at dinner , he made use of the very first interval in the cares of hospitality , the very first leisure from the saddle of mutton , to say to her ,
The decree is issued by somebody .
Mr . Weston is really as kind as herself .
" I honour his sincerity .
" You speak too plain .
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
Dear Harriet , I give myself joy of this .
" It is so cold , so very cold -- and looks and feels so very much like snow , that if it were to any other place or with any other party , I should really try not to go out to - day -- and dissuade my father from venturing ; but as he has made up his mind , and does not seem to feel the cold himself , I do not like to interfere , as I know it would be so great a disappointment to Mr . and Mrs . Weston .
The aunt was as tiresome as ever ; more tiresome , because anxiety for her health was now added to admiration of her powers ; and they had to listen to the description of exactly how little bread and butter she ate for breakfast , and how small a slice of mutton for dinner , as well as to see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her mother and herself ; and Jane ' s offences rose again .
" I either depend more upon Emma ' s good sense than you do , or am more anxious for her present comfort ; for I cannot lament the acquaintance .
I do admire your patriotism .
A piece of paper was found on the table this morning --( dropt , we suppose , by a fairy )-- containing a very pretty charade , and we have just copied it in ."
always my kindest friend on every occasion .
A worthy employment for a young lady ' s mind !
I love to look at her ; and I will add this praise , that I do not think her personally vain .
With mixed feelings , she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument , to listen .
A very few minutes more , however , completed the present trial .
" We are going to Box Hill to - morrow ;-- you will join us .
I am very fond of hearing Miss Bates talk .
My first doth affliction denote , Which my second is destin ' d to feel And my whole is the best antidote That affliction to soften and heal .--
But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks before it appeared , that when the insult came at last , it found her very differently affected .
Emma divined what every body present must be thinking .
Compliments , charades , and horrible blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved very well , and was only rather pale and silent .
It was a private resolution of hers , not communicated to him -- or at least not communicated in a way to carry conviction .-- Till yesterday , I know he said he was in the dark as to her plans .
I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill ; when , provoked by such conduct on my side , such shameful , insolent neglect of her , and such apparent devotion to Miss W ., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense to endure , she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me .-- In short , my dear madam , it was a quarrel blameless on her side , abominable on mine ; and I returned the same evening to Richmond , though I might have staid with you till the next morning , merely because I would be as angry with her as possible .
I should wish it ."
He joined them immediately , and , with scarcely an invitation , seated himself between them .
And so Patty told me , and I was excessively shocked indeed !
She could not bear that her master should not be able to have another apple - tart this spring .
" Never , never !"
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
" Ah !
" You will excuse my being so much over - powered .
Oh !
