She rose early , and wrote her letter to Harriet ; an employment which left her so very serious , so nearly sad , that Mr . Knightley , in walking up to Hartfield to breakfast , did not arrive at all too soon ; and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him , literally and figuratively , was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before .
" Your father will not be easy ; why do not you go ?"
The wedding was very much like other weddings , where the parties have no taste for finery or parade ; and Mrs . Elton , from the particulars detailed by her husband , thought it all extremely shabby , and very inferior to her own .--" Very little white satin , very few lace veils ; a most pitiful business !-- Selina would stare when she heard of it ."
He would do any good to her , or her family ; but --"
But she had an almost instant doubt of his caring for her as he had done , of his feeling the same tenderness in the same degree .
The only thing I do not thoroughly like is , that she seems to be sitting out of doors , with only a little shawl over her shoulders -- and it makes one think she must catch cold ."
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend -- her fair , lovely , amiable friend .
Her objections to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying did not in the least subside .
Mr . John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any doubts of the air of Randalls .
I am sure she does .
" Mrs . Bates , let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs .
" No , not true on your side .
" You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am ; but still you must , at least I hope you must , think the better of him for it .
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his clemency ; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in his opinion .
The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary .
While you considered me as having sinned against Emma Woodhouse , I could deserve nothing from either .
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour , and they had only accomplished some views of St . Mark ' s Place , Venice , when Frank Churchill entered the room .
" Certainly ," replied he , surprized , " I do not absolutely know it ; but it may be inferred .
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech , and saw no alarming symptoms of love .
You have shewn that you can dance , and you know we are not really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper ."
The advantage of the match I felt to be all on her side ; and had not the smallest doubt ( nor have I now ) that there would be a general cry - out upon her extreme good luck .
" Yes ," said he , smiling --" and reason good .
" How is it possible ?"
She had no scruple with regard to him .
This must not be ."
Her father ' s feelings were quite distinct .
My father depends on it .
' Tis a sad business ."
" You were speaking ," said he , gravely .
Could he have thought himself encouraged , his looks and language at parting would have been different .-- Still , however , I must be on my guard .
I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open my mouth , shan ' t I ?
And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind .
and it was but yesterday I was telling Mr . Cole , I really was ashamed to look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawing - room , while I do not know one note from another , and our little girls , who are but just beginning , perhaps may never make any thing of it ; and there is poor Jane Fairfax , who is mistress of music , has not any thing of the nature of an instrument , not even the pitifullest old spinet in the world , to amuse herself with .-- I was saying this to Mr . Cole but yesterday , and he quite agreed with me ; only he is so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging himself in the purchase , hoping that some of our good neighbours might be so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can ; and that really is the reason why the instrument was bought -- or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed of it .-- We are in great hopes that Miss Woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening ."
It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast .
cried she playfully .
What a blessing it is , when undue influence does not survive the grave !-- He gave his consent with very little persuasion ."
And as for objects of interest , objects for the affections , which is in truth the great point of inferiority , the want of which is really the great evil to be avoided in _not_ marrying , I shall be very well off , with all the children of a sister I love so much , to care about .
" How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on this occasion , Miss Fairfax .
She could not speak .
Ladies and gentlemen -- I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say , that she waives her right of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of , and only requires something very entertaining from each of you , in a general way .
Oh !
Oh !
" Yes ," replied Harriet modestly , but not fearfully --" I must say that I have ."
said she , as they proceeded -- speaking more to assist Mr . Weston in keeping his secret , than with any other view .
Poor Mr . Woodhouse was silent from consternation ; but every body else had something to say ; every body was either surprized or not surprized , and had some question to ask , or some comfort to offer .
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury , and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells .-- The Mr . Churchills were also in town ; and they were only waiting for November .
They _shall_ talk .
They will stay a good while when they do come , and he will be half his time with us .
Harriet really wished , and had wished some time , to consult a dentist .
" A bad thing !
I have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin .
Certainly , delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions , Mrs . Elton .
They might chuse to surprize her ."
Impossible that any situation could be more replete with comfort ; if we except , perhaps , Mrs . Suckling ' s own family , and Mrs . Bragge ' s ; but Mrs . Smallridge is intimate with both , and in the very same neighbourhood :-- lives only four miles from Maple Grove .
She is not the superior young woman which Emma ' s friend ought to be .
the proper sport of boys and girls , but a single woman , of good fortune , is always respectable , and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else .
How would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to him ?-- To have her haunting the Abbey , and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane ?-- ` So very kind and obliging !-- But he always had been such a very kind neighbour !'
So obliged to you for the carriage last night .
The scene enlarged ; two persons appeared ; Mrs . Weston and her son - in - law ; they were walking into Highbury ;-- to Hartfield of course .
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
and so forth -- I always felt that something would happen in our favour ; and so it has , you see .
He was not calm ; his spirits were evidently fluttered ; there was restlessness about him .
She felt it at her heart .
The wedding was no distant event , as the parties had only themselves to please , and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for ; and when he set out for Bath again , there was a general expectation , which a certain glance of Mrs . Cole ' s did not seem to contradict , that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride .
Harriet Smith ' s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing .
In the way of love , I am sure he does not .
Quite delightful to have you all meet so !-- Our little room so honoured !"
She could never see a fault in any of them .
But they live very comfortably .
I met her frequently at Weymouth .
It was a very extraordinary thing !
I must get rid of every thing .-- There it goes , and there is an end , thank Heaven !
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs . Elton for what was called an _introduction_ -- of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs . Elton ' s -- probably some vulgar , dashing widow , who , with the help of a boarder , just made a shift to live !-- The dignity of Miss Woodhouse , of Hartfield , was sunk indeed !
" No -- It will not be worth while .
I am sure I had much rather hear you .
Harriet ' s staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy .
It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred the society of William Larkins .
I thought it my duty as a friend , and older than yourself , to say thus much to you .
" Yes , our good Mrs . Elton .
Even then , I was not such a fool as not to mean to be reconciled in time ; but I was the injured person , injured by her coldness , and I went away determined that she should make the first advances .-- I shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party .
But , unfortunately -- in short , if your compassion does not stand my friend --"
They will come and stand by my chair , and say , ` Grandpapa , can you give me a bit of string ?'
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago !-- Emma could not but picture it all , and feel how justly they might resent , how naturally Harriet must suffer .
" Very well -- and as Randalls , I suppose , is not likely to have less influence than heretofore , it strikes me as a possible thing , Emma , that Henry and John may be sometimes in the way .
But she is really quite the gentlewoman ."
Are you in any doubt as to that ?
" You are extremely kind ," replied Miss Bates , highly gratified ; " you who are such a judge , and write so beautifully yourself .
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society .
At ten years old , she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen .
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
She would not marry , even if she were asked by Mr . Knightley .
He will think all the happiness , all the advantage , on your side of the question ; all the merit on mine .
They were entering the hall .
No , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond - street till just before he mounts his horse to - morrow .
At present , there was nothing to be done for Harriet ; good wishes for the future were all that could yet be possible on Emma ' s side .
" Mrs . Weston ' s manners ," said Emma , " were always particularly good .
Harriet was not insensible of manner ; she had voluntarily noticed her father ' s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder .
She knows nothing herself , and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing .
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr . Knightley .
