" Harriet , I will only venture to declare , that Mr . Knightley is the last man in the world , who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does ."
The weather added what it could of gloom .
What is to become of that ?-- Very true .
Harriet was not insensible of manner ; she had voluntarily noticed her father ' s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder .
It does relate to him , and I will tell you directly ;" ( resuming her work , and seeming resolved against looking up .)
Mrs . Weston was sorry for such a charge .
Emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ; that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ; and that Mr . Knightley certainly had not done him justice .
A long time , is not it , for a cold to hang upon her ?
We invalids think we are privileged people ."
I hope it does him some service with you ."
He had gone beyond the sweep -- some way along the Highbury road -- the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep -- in many places hardly enough to whiten the ground ; a very few flakes were falling at present , but the clouds were parting , and there was every appearance of its being soon over .
" Well , Mrs . Weston ," said Emma triumphantly when he left them , " what do you say now to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying Jane Fairfax ?"
A Mrs . Knightley for them all to give way to !-- No -- Mr .
" Nothing at all .
Let her marry Robert Martin , and she is safe , respectable , and happy for ever ; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly , and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large fortune , she may be a parlour - boarder at Mrs . Goddard ' s all the rest of her life -- or , at least , ( for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marry somebody or other ,) till she grow desperate , and is glad to catch at the old writing - master ' s son ."
She hoped no one could have said to her , " How could you be so unfeeling to your father ?-- I must , I will tell you truths while I can ."
She had an opportunity now of speaking her approbation while warm from her heart , for he stopped to hand her out .
Perfectly remember Mrs . Perry ' s coming .-- Extraordinary dream , indeed !"
Mr . Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury , and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed , though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life .
And now , poor girl !
Had it taken place only once a year , it would have been a grievance .
It seemed the best scheme ; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
For Miss ----------, read Miss Smith .
Mr . Perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr . Woodhouse ' s life ; and upon being applied to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless taken moderately .
" You will not find either , between Donwell and Highbury .
Do you think I am right ?"
" I am disappointed ," was his only answer .
" A house of her own !-- But where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
Mr . Woodhouse ' s peculiarities and fidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharp retort equally ill - bestowed .
The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints .
There will be enough for every hope and every fear ; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent , it suits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder .
Ah !
Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her , though fearful of its producing Mr . Elton .
I shall always have a great regard for the Miss Martins , especially Elizabeth , and should be very sorry to give them up , for they are quite as well educated as me .
Depend upon it , a man of six or seven - and - twenty can take care of himself ."
" Nay , she has always been a first favourite with him , as you very well know ."
This was the amount of the whole story ,-- of his communication and of Harriet ' s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech .-- He dared not stay longer than to see her well ; these several delays left him not another minute to lose ; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety to Mrs . Goddard , and notice of there being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr . Knightley , he set off , with all the grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself .
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault .
They were so deserving , that a _little_ higher should have been enough : but as it was , how could she have done otherwise ?-- Impossible !-- She could not repent .
Emma was pleased with the thought ; and producing the box , the table was quickly scattered over with alphabets , which no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves .
Then , if you please , you shall send it all to Mrs . Goddard ' s -- I do not know -- No , I think , Miss Woodhouse , I may just as well have it sent to Hartfield , and take it home with me at night .
A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise -- but there is generally time to recover from it afterwards .
I cannot keep my eyes from it .
Now , my dear madam , I will release you ; but I could not conclude before .
And if poor little Anna Weston is to be spoiled , it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have done for me , except falling in love with her when she is thirteen ."
" Mr . Elton indeed !"
Mr . Weston meanwhile , perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he was exciting , happy and cheerful as usual , and with all the right of being principal talker , which a day spent anywhere from home confers , was making himself agreeable among the rest ; and having satisfied the inquiries of his wife as to his dinner , convincing her that none of all her careful directions to the servants had been forgotten , and spread abroad what public news he had heard , was proceeding to a family communication , which , though principally addressed to Mrs . Weston , he had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in the room .
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to - morrow .
Indeed I do you justice , my good friend .
And as to its recommendations to _you_ , I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell on them .
I was so astonished when she first told me what she had been saying to Mrs . Elton , and when Mrs . Elton at the same moment came congratulating me upon it !
The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen and ladies , with their servants and furniture , I think is best observed by meals within doors .
my dear , human flesh !
She could not respect his eye , but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable .
She could not think that Harriet ' s solace or her own sins required more ; and she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they returned ;-- but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded , and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter , and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive -- " Mr . Elton is so good to the poor !"
Neither would Mr . Knightley ' s downright , decided , commanding sort of manner , though it suits _him_ very well ; his figure , and look , and situation in life seem to allow it ; but if any young man were to set about copying him , he would not be sufferable .
" He should be happy to see Mrs . Goddard .
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , Frank Churchill not too much in love , and Mr . Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her , how very happy a summer must be before her !
Miss Nash had told her all this , and had talked a great deal more about Mr . Elton ; and said , looking so very significantly at her , " that she did not pretend to understand what his business might be , but she only knew that any woman whom Mr . Elton could prefer , she should think the luckiest woman in the world ; for , beyond a doubt , Mr . Elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness ."
Selina , who is mild almost to a fault , bore with them much better ."
It darted through her , with the speed of an arrow , that Mr . Knightley must marry no one but herself !
And a delightful dance it was to be .
The power of observation would be soon given -- frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
He had never been in the room at the Crown in his life -- did not know the people who kept it by sight .-- Oh !
In he walked , the first and the handsomest ; and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and her niece , made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle , where sat Miss Woodhouse ; and till he could find a seat by her , would not sit at all .
I never heard of such a thing .
Mr . Knightley , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant .-- Did you ever see such dancing ?-- Was not it delightful ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal to it ."
" That ' s true ," she cried --" very true .
Short had been the notice -- short their meeting ; he was gone ; and Emma felt so sorry to part , and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry , and feeling it too much .
" Here ," resumed Harriet , turning to her box again , " here is something still more valuable , I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable , because this is what did really once belong to him , which the court - plaister never did ."
" No , indeed , I have no doubts at all on that head .
.
In respectability of character , there can be no doubt that they are .
But Harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and Emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
Of very important , very recordable events , it was not more productive than such meetings usually are .
She knows their ways best ; but I should not consider their silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present .
But this does not acquit _him_ , Mrs . Weston ; and I must say , that I think him greatly to blame .
Harriet , tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word , was always very long at a purchase ; and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing her mind , Emma went to the door for amusement .-- Much could not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury ;-- Mr . Perry walking hastily by , Mr . William Cox letting himself in at the office - door , Mr . Cole ' s carriage - horses returning from exercise , or a stray letter - boy on an obstinate mule , were the liveliest objects she could presume to expect ; and when her eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray , a tidy old woman travelling homewards from shop with her full basket , two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone , and a string of dawdling children round the baker ' s little bow - window eyeing the gingerbread , she knew she had no reason to complain , and was amused enough ; quite enough still to stand at the door .
How completely it meant , ` why should my picture be drawn ?'"
They walked off , followed in half a minute by Mr . Knightley .
" And now that I understand your question , I must pronounce it to be a very unfair one .
CHAPTER II
She is not to pay for the offence of others , by being held below the level of those with whom she is brought up .-- There can scarcely be a doubt that her father is a gentleman -- and a gentleman of fortune .-- Her allowance is very liberal ; nothing has ever been grudged for her improvement or comfort .-- That she is a gentleman ' s daughter , is indubitable to me ; that she associates with gentlemen ' s daughters , no one , I apprehend , will deny .-- She is superior to Mr . Robert Martin ."
I meant to take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did , but something or other hindered me all the morning ; first one thing , then another , there is no saying what , you know .
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself , and living under !-- The blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !-- she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she was wretched , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness .
And so does poor Mrs . Weston "-- with half a sigh and half a smile at her .
The manner , perhaps , may have as little to recommend them .
What is all this ?"
Selina says it is quite horror to her -- and I believe I have caught a little of her nicety .
I really never could think well of any body who proposed such a thing to any body else ."
dear , Kingston -- are you ?-- Mrs .
It was a clear thing he was less in love than he had been .
Consider , she is sitting down -- which naturally presents a different -- which in short gives exactly the idea -- and the proportions must be preserved , you know .
William did not seem to mind it himself , he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many ; for William , you know , thinks more of his master ' s profit than any thing ; but Mrs . Hodges , he said , was quite displeased at their being all sent away .
Oh !
I must have given you up ."
" It is not worth while , Harriet , to give Mrs . Ford the trouble of two parcels ."
Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin ."
She wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like Frank Churchill better .-- He seemed often observing her .
" No , to be sure you could not ; but I never thought of that before .
