I bring a new proposal on the subject :-- a thought of my father ' s , which waits only your approbation to be acted upon .
The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others ; the very few hundred pounds which she inherited from her father making independence impossible .
Does Mrs . Churchill do the same ?"
" When Frank left us ," continued he , " it was quite uncertain when we might see him again , which makes this day ' s news doubly welcome .
The landed property of Hartfield certainly was inconsiderable , being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbey estate , to which all the rest of Highbury belonged ; but their fortune , from other sources , was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell Abbey itself , in every other kind of consequence ; and the Woodhouses had long held a high place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which Mr . Elton had first entered not two years ago , to make his way as he could , without any alliances but in trade , or any thing to recommend him to notice but his situation and his civility .-- But he had fancied her in love with him ; that evidently must have been his dependence ; and after raving a little about the seeming incongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head , Emma was obliged in common honesty to stop and admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisant and obliging , so full of courtesy and attention , as ( supposing her real motive unperceived ) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy , like Mr . Elton , in fancying himself a very decided favourite .
How very differently we feel !-- Not think they will do each other any good !
Harriet certainly was not clever , but she had a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , was totally free from conceit , and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to .
They had gone , in short -- and very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady .
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
And it always ended in " Kitty , a fair but frozen maid ."
It was not thrown away on her , she bounded higher than ever , flew farther down the middle , and was in a continual course of smiles .
It is a great change ; and though she is amazingly fortunate -- such a situation , I suppose , as no young woman before ever met with on first going out -- do not think us ungrateful , Miss Woodhouse , for such surprising good fortune --( again dispersing her tears )-- but , poor dear soul !
CHAPTER XVIII
" As you do us such ample justice now ," said Emma , laughing , " I will venture to ask , whether you did not come a little doubtfully at first ?
She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do : but she does not know the parties so well as I do .
The spring I always think requires more than common care .
No indeed I am not ."
do the children grow ?
Harriet , she found , had never in her life been within side the Vicarage , and her curiosity to see it was so extreme , that , considering exteriors and probabilities , Emma could only class it , as a proof of love , with Mr . Elton ' s seeing ready wit in her .
" My dear Emma ," said he , moving from his chair into one close by her , " you are not going to tell me , I hope , that you had not a pleasant evening ."
" Will you read the letter ?"
He paused .
So would poor little Harriet .
They were laying themselves open to that very phrase -- and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple Grove by one lady , to Ireland by another .
Cole does not want to be wiser or wittier than his neighbours ."
Well !
He heard Frank Churchill next say , with a glance towards Jane , " I will give it to her -- shall I ?"
" Aye , that will be much best ," said Harriet , quite satisfied , " I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs .
When they all sat down it was better ; to her taste a great deal better , for Frank Churchill grew talkative and gay , making her his first object .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
" That will never be , however , I can assure you .
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
I am quite enough in love .
Good Mrs . Stokes would not know her own room again .
I remember it was written from Weymouth , and dated Sept . 28th -- and began , ` My dear Madam ,' but I forget how it went on ; and it was signed ` F . C . Weston Churchill .'
It was the delay of a great deal of pleasure and parade .
She continued to look back , but in vain ; and soon , with what appeared unusual speed , they were half way down the hill , and every thing left far behind .
" Very well .
How would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to him ?-- To have her haunting the Abbey , and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane ?-- ` So very kind and obliging !-- But he always had been such a very kind neighbour !'
cried Harriet indignantly .--" Oh !
Ours are all apple - tarts .
" Then , my dear Isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
" Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and Miss Bates ?
I shall press you no more ."
" Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she wanted ,"-- observed Mrs . Weston to him -- not in the least suspecting that she was addressing a lover .--" The expression of the eye is most correct , but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes .
" It was an awkward business , my dear , your spending the autumn at South End instead of coming here .
And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my three turns -- my winter walk ."
just behind .
" That Mr . Elton should really be in love with me ,-- me , of all people , who did not know him , to speak to him , at Michaelmas !
It is a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire ."
Frank Churchill ' s character was not desperate .-- She was his own Emma , by hand and word , when they returned into the house ; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchill then , he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow .
Weston .-- " Very well , I thank you , ma ' am .
" I know you , I know you ; you would take up with any thing ; but I shall be a little more nice , and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side ; with your superior talents , you have a right to move in the first circle .
Let his behaviour be the guide of your sensations .
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
I love to look at her ; and I will add this praise , that I do not think her personally vain .
Mr . Elton knows you ."
said Emma .
His wish of staying longer evidently did not please ; but it was not opposed .
yes ; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes to Highbury .
They remained but a few minutes together , as Miss Woodhouse must not be kept waiting ; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face , and in a flutter of spirits , which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose .
" My dear , you do not understand me .
I like him very much .
Mr . Knightley , what a delightful party last night ; how extremely pleasant .-- Did you ever see such dancing ?-- Was not it delightful ?-- Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill ; I never saw any thing equal to it ."
That will just do for me , you know .
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory ; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness , which at that moment would have been dreadful penance , by the sound of her father ' s footsteps .
I will move a little farther off ."
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that , when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister , she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella ' s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane Fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is very different from almost all the rest .
" Leave it to me .
" Oh !
" Nothing very bad .-- The fate of thousands .
no , it is a meeting at the Crown , a regular meeting .
They will soon be in Yorkshire .
He has been gone only four weeks ."
Whenever she is with us , Mrs . Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough ; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any body can .
But do come in .
" And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me ," said Emma , " and a very considerable one -- that I made the match myself .
yes , I observed it , I assure you .
-- with many other relative questions , all answered with patient politeness .
No , the young lady , to be sure .
` Have you , upon your honour ?'
I thought you had lost half your property , at least .
" Oh !
But between _us_ , I am convinced there never can be any likeness , except in being unmarried ."
" There is so pointed , and so particular a meaning in this compliment ," said she , " that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr . Elton ' s intentions .
.
Now I am secure of you for ever ."
When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with , of her excellence and patience , and my uncle ' s generosity , I am mad with joy : but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her , and how little I deserve to be forgiven , I am mad with anger .
Ah !
" Yes , and what you told me on that head , confirmed an idea which I had entertained before .-- I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr . Dixon or Miss Fairfax , but I cannot help suspecting either that , after making his proposals to her friend , he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_ , or that he became conscious of a little attachment on her side .
I have a very strong notion that it comes from him .
_She_ would notice her ; she would improve her ; she would detach her from her bad acquaintance , and introduce her into good society ; she would form her opinions and her manners .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
The bustle and joy of such an arrival , the many to be talked to , welcomed , encouraged , and variously dispersed and disposed of , produced a noise and confusion which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause , nor have endured much longer even for this ; but the ways of Hartfield and the feelings of her father were so respected by Mrs . John Knightley , that in spite of maternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones , and for their having instantly all the liberty and attendance , all the eating and drinking , and sleeping and playing , which they could possibly wish for , without the smallest delay , the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance to him , either in themselves or in any restless attendance on them .
to be a second time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery .
" Here comes this dear old beau of mine , I protest !-- Only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men !-- what a dear creature he is ;-- I assure you I like him excessively .
The weather does not look well , and grandmama will be uneasy .
" And I have not forgotten ," said Emma , " how sure you were that he might have come sooner if he would .
I trust , at least , that you do not think Mr . Knightley looking ill ," turning her eyes with affectionate anxiety towards her husband .
