I undertake the commission .
CHAPTER VII
Jane ' s alertness in moving , proved her as ready as her aunt had preconceived .
Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment .
The visit was of course short ; and there was so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it , that Emma would not allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady , and on no account to give one , beyond the nothing - meaning terms of being " elegantly dressed , and very pleasing ."
I wish Jane Fairfax very well ; but she tires me to death ."
But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once , and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come in time .
He said no more .
She could never quit him ."
Mrs . Weston ' s friends were all made happy by her safety ; and if the satisfaction of her well - doing could be increased to Emma , it was by knowing her to be the mother of a little girl .
I hope , with all my heart , the young man may be a Weston in merit , and a Churchill in fortune .-- But Harriet Smith -- I have not half done about Harriet Smith .
" Good God !"
Miss Fairfax must already have given her account .-- I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow ."
I must get rid of every thing .-- There it goes , and there is an end , thank Heaven !
We will not be parted .
" No , I thank you .
These were charming feelings -- but not lasting .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
" She thinks herself wrong , then , for having consented to a private engagement ?"
And at last , as if resolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object , he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person .
It seemed at first an accidental division , but it never materially varied .
She thought well of Frank in almost every respect ; and , what was more , she loved him very much , and her defence was , therefore , earnest .
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend -- for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , Jane Fairfax .-- Since her last conversation with Mrs . Weston and Mr . Knightley , she was more conscience - stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been .-- Mr .
" But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax !"
She promised to think of it , and advised him to think of it more ; but he was fully convinced , that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject .
He said , from the first , it was a very good sort -- which was our great comfort ; but the measles are a dreadful complaint .
" Oh !"
He went to Highbury the next morning , and satisfied himself on that point .
" Quite out of the question , quite out of the question ," he replied ;-- " but you must often wish it , I am sure ."
She was short , plump , and fair , with a fine bloom , blue eyes , light hair , regular features , and a look of great sweetness , and , before the end of the evening , Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person , and quite determined to continue the acquaintance .
" What shall you do !
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was already made , and could not but hope that the gipsy , though she had _told_ no fortune , might be proved to have made Harriet ' s .-- About a fortnight after the alarm , they came to a sufficient explanation , and quite undesignedly .
This letter must make its way to Emma ' s feelings .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
And besides the operation of this , as a general principle , you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs . Elton by her superiority both of mind and manner ; and that , face to face , Mrs . Elton treats her with all the respect which she has a claim to .
" And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while ; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure ."
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
I am going to London , to spend a few days with John and Isabella .
After a little more discourse in praise of gruel , with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by every body , he proceeded to say , with an air of grave reflection ,
Emma was very compassionate ; and the distresses of the poor were as sure of relief from her personal attention and kindness , her counsel and her patience , as from her purse .
Mr . Elton had retreated into the card - room , looking ( Emma trusted ) very foolish .
I am very fond of hearing Miss Bates talk .
But I will shew her greater attention than I have done ."
He had expressed himself as to coming , with more than common certainty .
I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'
" Ah !"
Mrs . Elton ' s resources were inadequate to such an attack .
at three - and - twenty to be the king of his company -- the great man -- the practised politician , who is to read every body ' s character , and make every body ' s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority ; to be dispensing his flatteries around , that he may make all appear like fools compared with himself !
Emma ' s courage returned , and she walked on .
" Yes , our good Mrs . Elton .
Now I am secure of you for ever ."
" And the next news , I suppose , will be , that we are to lose you -- just as I begin to know you ."
And who but Mr . Knightley could know and bear with Mr . Woodhouse , so as to make such an arrangement desirable !-- The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr . Woodhouse had been always felt in her husband ' s plans and her own , for a marriage between Frank and Emma .
" I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years ' experience , and by not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child .
" And now we shall just miss them ; too provoking !-- I do not know when I have been so disappointed ."
But I will shew her greater attention than I have done ."
" Poor comfort !"
It was too old a story .-- Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet .-- They took a few turns together along the walk .-- The shade was most refreshing , and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day .
my dear , we cannot begin too early ; you are not aware of the difficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing ."
" For shame , Emma !
A superior performer !-- very far from it , I assure you .
I am not in the least ashamed of my meaning ."
Things must come to a crisis soon now .
She would be very glad to stay ."
He has been gone only four weeks ."
And then not to find him at home !
how shall you employ yourself when you grow old ?"
" He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed -- he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield , he must hurry off ."
We must do whatever is to be done quickest , and I think our feelings will lose no time there .
But you had better go with Mrs . Weston and hear the instrument ."
What ever she might feel of brighter hope , she betrayed nothing .
Ford .-- " Yes -- no -- yes , to Mrs . Goddard ' s .
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
He could not believe her to be encouraging him .
" And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you ?"
One could not leave her out ."
And there was time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment , as their visit included all the rest of the morning .
From that moment , Emma could have taken her oath that Mr . Knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument .
Any other situation would have been much less in character .
She will break it to you better than I can .
Mrs . Cole was telling that she had been calling on Miss Bates , and as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sight of a pianoforte -- a very elegant looking instrument -- not a grand , but a large - sized square pianoforte ; and the substance of the story , the end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize , and inquiry , and congratulations on her side , and explanations on Miss Bates ' s , was , that this pianoforte had arrived from Broadwood ' s the day before , to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece -- entirely unexpected ; that at first , by Miss Bates ' s account , Jane herself was quite at a loss , quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it -- but now , they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only one quarter ;-- of course it must be from Colonel Campbell .
There , it is done .
Mr . Knightley to be no longer coming there for his evening comfort !-- No longer walking in at all hours , as if ever willing to change his own home for their ' s !-- How was it to be endured ?
It is impossible to express our surprize .
Mrs . Weston , capital in her country - dances , was seated , and beginning an irresistible waltz ; and Frank Churchill , coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma , had secured her hand , and led her up to the top .
" But you will come again ," said Emma .
Mr . Woodhouse agreed to it all , but added ,
She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself , by representing that though he certainly would make them nine , yet he always said so little , that the increase of noise would be very immaterial .
CHAPTER IX
Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs . Eltons , the Mrs . Perrys , and the Mrs . Coles , who would force themselves anywhere ; neither could she feel any right of preference herself -- she submitted , therefore , and only questioned Miss Bates farther as to her niece ' s appetite and diet , which she longed to be able to assist .
Still , however , affection was glad to catch at any reasonable excuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment .
" You will soon be cooler , if you sit still ," said Emma .
I will answer for it _she_ never betrayed the least thing in the world .
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
you will never guess .
To give up one ' s child !
A circumstance rather unlucky occurred .
This was the amount of the whole story ,-- of his communication and of Harriet ' s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech .-- He dared not stay longer than to see her well ; these several delays left him not another minute to lose ; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety to Mrs . Goddard , and notice of there being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr . Knightley , he set off , with all the grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself .
then , don ' t speak it , don ' t speak it ," she eagerly cried .
