Your resolution , or rather your expectation of never marrying , results from an idea that the person whom you might prefer , would be too greatly your superior in situation to think of you .
What I said just now , meant nothing .
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
Mr . Churchill ' s loss would be dreadful indeed .
" Oh !
He saw that Emma had soon made it out , and found it highly entertaining , though it was something which she judged it proper to appear to censure ; for she said , " Nonsense !
It was a done thing ; Mr . Elton was to go , and never had his broad handsome face expressed more pleasure than at this moment ; never had his smile been stronger , nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her .
" No ; not immediately here .
I am no dancer ."
How cheerful , how animated , how suspicious , how busy their imaginations all are !"
" Oh !
You must promise me not to sit up ."
Were she your equal in situation -- but , Emma , consider how far this is from being the case .
" Are you well , my Emma ?"
If Jane does not get well soon , we will call in Mr . Perry .
I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad .
She was obliged to repeat and explain it , before it was fully comprehended ; and then , being quite new , farther representations were necessary to make it acceptable .
" She should always send for Perry , if the child appeared in the slightest degree disordered , were it only for a moment .
" Oh !
go to - day , go to - day .
It was a great consolation that Mr . Elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him -- that Harriet ' s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body ' s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father ' s being given a moment ' s uneasiness about it .
Very much grieved and concerned -- I had flattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I knew had been given her in the morning ."
Mr . Elton is going to be married ."
" But it is never safe to sit out of doors , my dear ."
" Oh yes !-- that is , no -- I do not know -- but I believe he has read a good deal -- but not what you would think any thing of .
Come , and eat my strawberries .
From that moment , Emma could have taken her oath that Mr . Knightley had had no concern in giving the instrument .
That is _court_ .
And Mr . Dixon seems a very charming young man , quite worthy of him .
cried Emma , " I know there is not a better creature in the world : but you must allow , that what is good and what is ridiculous are most unfortunately blended in her ."
A little while ago , every letter to Isabella brought an account of fresh gaieties ; dinners at Mr . Cole ' s , or balls at the Crown .
" Oh !
" Nay , dear Emma , now I must take his part ; for though he has been wrong in this instance , I have known him long enough to answer for his having many , very many , good qualities ; and --"
A great deal of very reasonable , very just displeasure I had to persuade away .
He had nestled down his head most conveniently .
" You mistake me , you quite mistake me ," she replied , exerting herself .
" My dear , you are too particular ," said her husband .
then , said I , I must run across , I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in ; my mother will be so very happy to see her -- and now we are such a nice party , she cannot refuse .--` Aye , pray do ,' said Mr . Frank Churchill , ` Miss Woodhouse ' s opinion of the instrument will be worth having .'
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room .
" But I am afraid , Mr . Elton , Harriet will not like to sit .
But hush , hush !"
I could not stay two minutes .
" By the bye ," said Frank Churchill to Mrs . Weston presently , " what became of Mr . Perry ' s plan of setting up his carriage ?"
The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected .-- Very extraordinary !-- And nobody knew at all which way he was gone .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
Compliments , charades , and horrible blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved very well , and was only rather pale and silent .
She was sure of Mrs . Weston ' s wishing it to be communicated ; especially to one , who , like Mr . Knightley , had seen so much to blame in his conduct .
A word was put in for a second young Cox ; and at last , Mr . Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out , it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten , and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of .
Miss Hawkins ,-- I dare say , an excellent young woman .
" Certainly -- very strong it was ; to own the truth , a great deal stronger than , if _I_ had been Miss Campbell , would have been at all agreeable to me .
He looked rather doubtingly -- rather confused ; said something about " honour ,"-- glanced at Emma and at Harriet , and then seeing the book open on the table , took it up , and examined it very attentively .
She never stopt till she had gone through the whole ; and though it was impossible not to feel that he had been wrong , yet he had been less wrong than she had supposed -- and he had suffered , and was very sorry -- and he was so grateful to Mrs . Weston , and so much in love with Miss Fairfax , and she was so happy herself , that there was no being severe ; and could he have entered the room , she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever .
Quite a humourist .
We had great amusement with those letters one morning .
" One ought to be at Enscombe , and know the ways of the family , before one decides upon what he can do ," replied Mrs . Weston .
As Harriet now lived , the Martins could not get at her , without seeking her , where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension to seek her ; for since her refusal of the brother , the sisters never had been at Mrs . Goddard ' s ; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech .
Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs . Weston .
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
Mr . Weston would not be blind to folly , though in his own son ; but he is very likely to have a more yielding , complying , mild disposition than would suit your notions of man ' s perfection .
The visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day ; and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion , must be amply repaid in the splendour of popularity .
Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove ."
You must have seen that I did .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
Young ladies should take care of themselves .-- Young ladies are delicate plants .
The power of observation would be soon given -- frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
Dining once with the Coles -- and having a ball talked of , which never took place .
" Your father will not be easy ; why do not you go ?"
" But , Mr . Knightley , she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor , and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for ."
She will probably have soon done , and then we shall go home .
` Oh !'
She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty .
On his side were the inquiries ,--" Was she a horsewoman ?-- Pleasant rides ?-- Pleasant walks ?-- Had they a large neighbourhood ?-- Highbury , perhaps , afforded society enough ?-- There were several very pretty houses in and about it .-- Balls -- had they balls ?-- Was it a musical society ?"
here ' s Miss Woodhouse .-- Dear Miss Woodhouse , how do you do ?-- Very well I thank you , quite well .
If I had but her memory !
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
Mr . Weston is really as kind as herself .
Let me entreat you to run no risks .
no -- a very bad plan .
She paused over it , while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion , with a " Well , well ," and was at last forced to add , " Is it a good letter ?
I am delighted to find that you can vouchsafe to let your imagination wander -- but it will not do -- very sorry to check you in your first essay -- but indeed it will not do .
" Oh !
The case is , you see , that the Campbells are going to Ireland .
As she reflected more , she seemed but to feel it more .
-- Those were the words ; in them lay the tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of , and which constituted the real misery of the business to her .
But is not this a sudden scheme ?"
It inspired little more than an animating curiosity .
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
With mixed feelings , she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument , to listen .
To take her -- be it only an hour or two -- from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ; and the following morning she wrote again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name -- mentioning that she had Mr . Perry ' s decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for his patient .
But Mr . Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits , not at all to confuse his intellects .
" I do not know what I could imagine , but I confess that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers .
The mistake had been slight .
asked Isabella in the plaintive tone which just suited her father .
" We think so very differently on this point , Mr . Knightley , that there can be no use in canvassing it .
" I do not think he is conceited either , in general ," said Harriet , her conscience opposing such censure ; " at least , he is very good natured , and I shall always feel much obliged to him , and have a great regard for -- but that is quite a different thing from -- and you know , though he may like me , it does not follow that I should -- and certainly I must confess that since my visiting here I have seen people -- and if one comes to compare them , person and manners , there is no comparison at all , _one_ is so very handsome and agreeable .
He agreed to it , but with so quiet a " Yes ," as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it .
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury , and longed to dance again ; and the last half - hour of an evening which Mr . Woodhouse was persuaded to spend with his daughter at Randalls , was passed by the two young people in schemes on the subject .
" Ill , very ill -- that is , if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill .
