It might be weeks , it might be only a few days , before the horse were useable ; but no preparations could be ventured on , and it was all melancholy stagnation .
Her mind was in a state of flutter and wonder , which made it impossible for her to be collected .
Where the wound had been given , there must the cure be found if anywhere ; and Emma felt that , till she saw her in the way of cure , there could be no true peace for herself .
She would be very glad to stay ."
Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed , without reproaches , or apparent sense of ill - usage ; and yet Emma fancied there was a something of resentment , a something bordering on it in her style , which increased the desirableness of their being separate .-- It might be only her own consciousness ; but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite without resentment under such a stroke .
We will not despair , however .
I am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think such beauty , and such temper , the highest claims a woman could possess ."
And there would be poor Emma in the carriage behind .
Her caution was thrown away .
He has imposed on me , but he has not injured me .
Weston ."
" Yes , so I imagined .
" I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would , in the common course of things , occur to him ."
Mrs . Churchill , after being disliked at least twenty - five years , was now spoken of with compassionate allowances .
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her , and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party the last half of the way ; but his alarms were needless ; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished , and Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , their five children , and a competent number of nursery - maids , all reaching Hartfield in safety .
Mr . Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile ; and succeeded without difficulty , upon Mrs . Elton ' s beginning to talk to him .
" How do you like Mrs .
She asked no more questions therefore , merely employed her own fancy , and that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money concern -- something just come to light , of a disagreeable nature in the circumstances of the family ,-- something which the late event at Richmond had brought forward .
It saves trouble , and is a something to get me out .
He talked of Harriet , and praised her so warmly , that she could not suppose any thing wanting which a little time would not add .
She is his principal correspondent , I assure you .
How often have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her !"
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
Mrs . Weston , capital in her country - dances , was seated , and beginning an irresistible waltz ; and Frank Churchill , coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma , had secured her hand , and led her up to the top .
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself , poor Harriet must , in mere charitable caution , be kept at a distance from .
The hasty engagement she had entered into with that woman -- Here , my dear madam , I was obliged to leave off abruptly , to recollect and compose myself .-- I have been walking over the country , and am now , I hope , rational enough to make the rest of my letter what it ought to be .-- It is , in fact , a most mortifying retrospect for me .
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , Frank Churchill not too much in love , and Mr . Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her , how very happy a summer must be before her !
They seem very comfortable as they are , and if she were to take any pains to marry him , she would probably repent it .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
I am sure Miss Nash would -- for Miss Nash thinks her own sister very well married , and it is only a linen - draper ."
He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived more evil than good from them .
" Yes , here I am , my good friend ; and here I have been so long , that anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise ; but , the truth is , that I am waiting for my lord and master .
I did not see you before .
" If I made myself intelligible yesterday , this letter will be expected ; but expected or not , I know it will be read with candour and indulgence .-- You are all goodness , and I believe there will be need of even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct .-- But I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent .
In this age of literature , such collections on a very grand scale are not uncommon .
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
Do you think him so very plain ?"
You do us a great deal of honour to - day , I am sure .
These were her reasons -- she had no better .
This is a connexion which offers nothing but good .
" Upon my word ," exclaimed Emma , " you amuse me !
You do not know how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations .
At the same time , I will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint , because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware .
Emma ' s attempts to stop her father had been vain ; and when he had reached such a point as this , she could not wonder at her brother - in - law ' s breaking out .
What do you imagine his age to be ?"
yes , I must be there ; I could not refuse ; and I will keep as much awake as I can ; but I would rather be at home , looking over William Larkins ' s week ' s account ; much rather , I confess .-- Pleasure in seeing dancing !-- not I , indeed -- I never look at it -- I do not know who does .-- Fine dancing , I believe , like virtue , must be its own reward .
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk ."
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr . Elton ' s having dropt a hint .
Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings , Mr . and Mrs . Weston ' s visit this morning was in another respect particularly opportune .
" Ah !-- Indeed I am very sorry .-- Come , shake hands with me ."
" Oh !
" Oh !
For it is not five minutes since I received Mrs . Cole ' s note -- no , it cannot be more than five -- or at least ten -- for I had got my bonnet and spencer on , just ready to come out -- I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about the pork -- Jane was standing in the passage -- were not you , Jane ?-- for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting - pan large enough .
Then here is my last ,"-- unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in small size , whole - length --" my last and my best -- my brother , Mr . John Knightley .-- This did not want much of being finished , when I put it away in a pet , and vowed I would never take another likeness .
Mrs . Weston -- it is too calm a censure .
So then , I try to put it out of her thoughts , and say , Come ma ' am , do not let us think about it any more ."
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened , and she were enabled to see that Mr . Elton was not the superior creature she had believed him .
Randalls is such a distance .
She had given them neither men , nor names , nor places , that could raise a blush .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
She would not be in a hurry to find fault , but she suspected that there was no elegance ;-- ease , but not elegance .-- She was almost sure that for a young woman , a stranger , a bride , there was too much ease .
I beg your pardon .
Fetch Miss Bates .
But she was always right .
Such a very kind attention -- and so thoughtful an attention !-- the sort of thing that so few men would think of .
From that evening , or at least from the time of Miss Woodhouse ' s encouraging her to think of him , Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more than he had been used to do , and of his having indeed quite a different manner towards her ; a manner of kindness and sweetness !-- Latterly she had been more and more aware of it .
But do not imagine that I want to influence you ."
Mr . Weston was a native of Highbury , and born of a respectable family , which for the last two or three generations had been rising into gentility and property .
He was a married man , with only one living child , a girl , about Jane ' s age : and Jane became their guest , paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all ; and before she was nine years old , his daughter ' s great fondness for her , and his own wish of being a real friend , united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education .
" Shall I ring the bell ?"
I shall never forget his flying Henry ' s kite for him that very windy day last Easter -- and ever since his particular kindness last September twelvemonth in writing that note , at twelve o ' clock at night , on purpose to assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham , I have been convinced there could not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence .-- If any body can deserve him , it must be Miss Taylor ."
I should not be helped so soon , but it smells most excellent , and I cannot help beginning ."
He seemed to have all the life and spirit , cheerful feelings , and social inclinations of his father , and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe .
Knightley .-- Every other part of her mind was disgusting .
If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days ; I was always glad he did not come at Christmas ; now we are going to have just the right weather for him , fine , dry , settled weather .
She felt for Harriet , with pain and with contrition ; but no flight of generosity run mad , opposing all that could be probable or reasonable , entered her brain .
On this article I can fully acquit him .
" Well ," said she to herself , " this is most strange !-- After I had got him off so well , to chuse to go into company , and leave Harriet ill behind !-- Most strange indeed !-- But there is , I believe , in many men , especially single men , such an inclination -- such a passion for dining out -- a dinner engagement is so high in the class of their pleasures , their employments , their dignities , almost their duties , that any thing gives way to it -- and this must be the case with Mr . Elton ; a most valuable , amiable , pleasing young man undoubtedly , and very much in love with Harriet ; but still , he cannot refuse an invitation , he must dine out wherever he is asked .
There was no denying that those brothers had penetration .
" You do quite right ," said she ;--" we will make your apologies to Mr . and Mrs .
We will not despair , however .
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr . Frank Churchill , who is like nobody by his side .
Mrs . Weston , your argument weighs most with me .
The public pays and must be served well ."
" I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs . Weston .
" Agreed , agreed .
I know he had horses to - day -- for we arrived together ; and I laughed at him about it , but he said not a word that could betray ."
" Mr . Weston would undoubtedly support me , if he were here , for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject .
" Mr . Weston do not trifle with me .-- Consider how many of my dearest friends are now in Brunswick Square .
He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet .
" Why will not you write one yourself for us , Mr .
" I am most happy to hear it -- but only Jane Fairfax one knows to be so very accomplished and superior !-- and exactly Emma ' s age ."
" I like your plan ," cried Mr . Weston .
You will soon , I earnestly hope , know her thoroughly yourself .-- No description can describe her .
Find some body for me .
I always deserve the best treatment , because I never put up with any other ; and , therefore , you must give me a plain , direct answer .
I do not pretend to Emma ' s genius for foretelling and guessing .
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy , and very communicative ; Jane would hardly eat any thing :-- Mr . Perry recommended nourishing food ; but every thing they could command ( and never had any body such good neighbours ) was distasteful .
We never see any thing of it on our club - nights ."
WINDSOR - JULY .
