" What is the matter now ?"
The appearance of the little sitting - room as they entered , was tranquillity itself ; Mrs . Bates , deprived of her usual employment , slumbering on one side of the fire , Frank Churchill , at a table near her , most deedily occupied about her spectacles , and Jane Fairfax , standing with her back to them , intent on her pianoforte .
She must be collected and calm .
I do not pretend to it .
" But it is never safe to sit out of doors , my dear ."
yes -- very -- a very pleasing young woman ."
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
Mrs . Weston was disengaged and Emma began again --" Mr . Frank Churchill writes one of the best gentleman ' s hands I ever saw ."
He continued ,
In short , she sat , during the first visit , looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency ; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and was determining that she would dislike her no longer .
You will not like the noise ."
Mr . Knightley , is not she ?"
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax , to judge of her honest regret in this woeful change ; but when they did meet , her composure was odious .
and that ' s so dreadful !"
here it comes .
But Mrs . Dixon must be very much disappointed .
The difference which Randalls , Randalls alone makes in your goings - on , is very great ."
She would have ordered the carriage , and come to you , but she must see you _alone_ , and that you know --( nodding towards her father )-- Humph !-- Can you come ?"
I could not bear to have Henry supplanted .-- Mr . Knightley marry !-- No , I have never had such an idea , and I cannot adopt it now .
" I do not know .
Leave shame to her .
I wanted to keep it from Jane ' s knowledge ; but , unluckily , I had mentioned it before I was aware ."
You do us a great deal of honour to - day , I am sure .
" To be sure ," said Harriet , in a mortified voice , " he is not so genteel as real gentlemen ."
" I believe it is very true , my dear , indeed ," said Mr . Woodhouse , with a sigh .
Mr . Wingfield told me that he has never known them more general or heavy -- except when it has been quite an influenza ."
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
What would you advise me to do ?
" Dear me !-- it is so odd to hear a woman talk so !"
I never compliment .
" A man ," said he , " must have a very good opinion of himself when he asks people to leave their own fireside , and encounter such a day as this , for the sake of coming to see him .
On the contrary , her plans and proceedings were more and more justified and endeared to her by the general appearances of the next few days .
Emma could say no more .
We have never been there above once since the new approach was made ; but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely .
When they had been all walking together , he had so often come and walked by her , and talked so very delightfully !-- He seemed to want to be acquainted with her .
The rest of the day , the following night , were hardly enough for her thoughts .-- She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours .
" I do remember it ," cried Emma ; " I perfectly remember it .-- Talking about spruce - beer .-- Oh !
I can only say that there was smoothness outwardly .
They are very , very kind in their visits .
I knew it was -- but had not resolution enough to part with them ."
Oh no !
To guess what all this meant , was impossible even for Emma .
" There is one subject ," he replied , " I hope but one , on which we do not think alike ."
Your meaning must be unequivocal ; no doubts or demurs : and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the pain you are inflicting as propriety requires , will present themselves unbidden to _your_ mind , I am persuaded .
" So much the better -- or so much the worse :-- I do not know which .
I did not know what to do .
She must be collected and calm .
" I have the greatest pleasure , my dear Emma , in forwarding to you the enclosed .
You will not be sorry to find yourself at home ."
" There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends , the Eltons ," was his next observation .--" His feelings are natural .-- What !
John Knightley came ; but Mr . Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day .
" With a great deal of pleasure , sir , at any time ," said Mr . Knightley , laughing , " and I agree with you entirely , that it will be a much better thing .
If it were to be shared with the woman he loved , he could not think any man to be pitied for having that house .
Mr . John Knightley smiled , and replied ,
" No , indeed ," cried Emma , most happy to begin , " not in the least .
I must buy something at Ford ' s .
Her early attachment to herself was very amiable ; and her inclination for good company , and power of appreciating what was elegant and clever , shewed that there was no want of taste , though strength of understanding must not be expected .
To take her -- be it only an hour or two -- from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ; and the following morning she wrote again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name -- mentioning that she had Mr . Perry ' s decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for his patient .
This was one of her expressions .
How little did I think !-- The two Abbots and I ran into the front room and peeped through the blind when we heard he was going by , and Miss Nash came and scolded us away , and staid to look through herself ; however , she called me back presently , and let me look too , which was very good - natured .
Concession must be out of the question ; but it was time to appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled ; and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship , that when he came into the room she had one of the children with her -- the youngest , a nice little girl about eight months old , who was now making her first visit to Hartfield , and very happy to be danced about in her aunt ' s arms .
" Of all horrid things , leave - taking is the worst ."
I am much mistaken if Emma ' s doctrines give any strength of mind , or tend at all to make a girl adapt herself rationally to the varieties of her situation in life .-- They only give a little polish ."
On the contrary , I think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr . Elton as a model .
I assure you , Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character , and interests me more than I can express ."
" Come ," said she , " I will tell you something , in return for what you have told me .
She had sent while dressing , and the answer had been , " Much the same -- not better ."
" I have heard her speak of the acquaintance ," said Emma ; " she is a very elegant young woman ."
Their love of society , and their new dining - room , prepared every body for their keeping dinner - company ; and a few parties , chiefly among the single men , had already taken place .
Do not forget your engagement ."
Well , what do you say to it ?-- I always told you he would be here again soon , did not I ?-- Anne , my dear , did not I always tell you so , and you would not believe me ?-- In town next week , you see -- at the latest , I dare say ; for _she_ is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done ; most likely they will be there to - morrow or Saturday .
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
The power of observation would be soon given -- frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
He paused .-- She coloured and laughed .--" I know you saw my letter , and think you may remember my wish in your favour .
She would not have been puzzled , had she dared fix on them .
I have been making discoveries and forming plans , just like yourself , and I must tell them while the idea is fresh .
She seemed bent on giving no real insight into Mr . Dixon ' s character , or her own value for his company , or opinion of the suitableness of the match .
" My dear Jane , what is this I hear ?-- Going to the post - office in the rain !-- This must not be , I assure you .-- You sad girl , how could you do such a thing ?-- It is a sign I was not there to take care of you ."
Nobody talked about it .
A worthy employment for a young lady ' s mind !
The Coles expressed themselves so properly -- there was so much real attention in the manner of it -- so much consideration for her father .
It was hardly right ; but it had been so strong an idea , that it would escape her , and his submission to all that she told , was a compliment to her penetration , which made it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue .
poor fellow !-- sad business for him .-- She was extremely concerned ; for , though very eccentric , he had a thousand good qualities .-- How could he be so taken in ?-- Did not think him at all in love -- not in the least .-- Poor Knightley !-- There would be an end of all pleasant intercourse with him .-- How happy he had been to come and dine with them whenever they asked him !
" They would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding - screen from London , which they hoped might keep Mr . Woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company ."
so long ago as the 7th of November , ( as I am going to read to you ,) and has never been well since .
" Yes , do ."
Ladies and gentlemen , I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse ( who , wherever she is , presides ) to say , that she desires to know what you are all thinking of ?"
" Of all horrid things , leave - taking is the worst ."
My mother desires her very best compliments and regards , and a thousand thanks , and says you really quite oppress her ."
She could not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knew them must think of .
" Oh !
Nobody is healthy in London , nobody can be .
" Oh !"
The fever was over , and Emma could harbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
" Yes -- I imagined -- that is -- I did not --"
I would give any money for it .
You and I shall not want opportunities .
Your marrying will be equal to the match at Randalls .
I don ' t say that it is not a disagreeable business -- but things might be much worse .-- If we walk fast , we shall soon be at Randalls ."
