He could not understand it ; but there were symptoms of intelligence between them -- he thought so at least -- symptoms of admiration on his side , which , having once observed , he could not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning , however he might wish to escape any of Emma ' s errors of imagination .
" Oh !
Jane , you have never seen Mr .
With such sensations , Mr . Elton ' s civilities were dreadfully ill - timed ; but she had the comfort of appearing very polite , while feeling very cross -- and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly pass without bringing forward the same information again , or the substance of it , from the open - hearted Mr .
" Insufferable woman !"
She was short , plump , and fair , with a fine bloom , blue eyes , light hair , regular features , and a look of great sweetness , and , before the end of the evening , Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person , and quite determined to continue the acquaintance .
Mr . Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was .
" Conjecture -- aye , sometimes one conjectures right , and sometimes one conjectures wrong .
She is known only as parlour - boarder at a common school .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
Another slice of cold meat , another draught of Madeira and water , will make you nearly on a par with the rest of us ."
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day .-- Shocking plan , living together .
" I am glad I have done being in love with him .
Emma turned round to look at her in consternation , and hastily said ,
Many counties , I believe , are called the garden of England , as well as Surry ."
Did you ever hear of that ?-- A water party ; and by some accident she was falling overboard .
" You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax , sir , are you ?"
No , my dear little modest Harriet , depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond - street till just before he mounts his horse to - morrow .
" Yes , simpleton as I was !-- but I am quite ashamed of it now , and wish I could forget as easily as I can burn them .
" Not for the world ," said Emma , smiling graciously , " would I advise you either way .
Every feeling was offended ; and the forbearance of her outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity in her reflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr . Weston ' s temper .
To talk would be only to irritate .-- She wrote to her , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to Hartfield ; acknowledging it to be her conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of _one_ topic had better be avoided ; and hoping , that if a few days were allowed to pass before they met again , except in the company of others -- she objected only to a tete - a - tete -- they might be able to act as if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday .-- Harriet submitted , and approved , and was grateful .
" One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher of a school , Harriet .
But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_ , was increasing , not lessening , Mr . Woodhouse ' s agitation .
Disputable , however , as might be the taste of such a termination , it was in itself a charming walk , and the view which closed it extremely pretty .-- The considerable slope , at nearly the foot of which the Abbey stood , gradually acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds ; and at half a mile distant was a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur , well clothed with wood ;-- and at the bottom of this bank , favourably placed and sheltered , rose the Abbey Mill Farm , with meadows in front , and the river making a close and handsome curve around it .
Mrs . Weston , kind - hearted and musical , was particularly interested by the circumstance , and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject ; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine ' s countenance .
I do not know who would ever look at him in the company of the other .
" Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her , or that she admired him ?"
She was rather low all the evening , but Emma could allow for her amiable regrets , and sometimes relieved them by speaking of her own affection , sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr . Elton .
" Ah !
Mrs . Weston , you would be quite laid up ; do not let them talk of such a wild thing .
But when satisfied on all these points , and their acquaintance proportionably advanced , he contrived to find an opportunity , while their two fathers were engaged with each other , of introducing his mother - in - law , and speaking of her with so much handsome praise , so much warm admiration , so much gratitude for the happiness she secured to his father , and her very kind reception of himself , as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please -- and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her .
" Ah !-- Indeed I am very sorry .-- Come , shake hands with me ."
June will soon be here ."
No , indeed , Miss Woodhouse , you need not be afraid ; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery .
Some portion of respect for herself , however , in spite of all these demerits -- some concern for her own appearance , and a strong sense of justice by Harriet --( there would be no need of _compassion_ to the girl who believed herself loved by Mr . Knightley -- but justice required that she should not be made unhappy by any coldness now ,) gave Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther with calmness , with even apparent kindness .-- For her own advantage indeed , it was fit that the utmost extent of Harriet ' s hopes should be enquired into ; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which had been so voluntarily formed and maintained -- or to deserve to be slighted by the person , whose counsels had never led her right .-- Rousing from reflection , therefore , and subduing her emotion , she turned to Harriet again , and , in a more inviting accent , renewed the conversation ; for as to the subject which had first introduced it , the wonderful story of Jane Fairfax , that was quite sunk and lost .-- Neither of them thought but of Mr . Knightley and themselves .
What has he been judging by ?-- I am not conscious of any difference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this time for my marrying any more than at another .-- But it was so , I suppose .
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself , poor Harriet must , in mere charitable caution , be kept at a distance from .
Well , Frank , your dream certainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent .
The real evils , indeed , of Emma ' s situation were the power of having rather too much her own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments .
" Well !
You cannot imagine how suddenly it has come on me !
A crowd in a little room -- Miss Woodhouse , you have the art of giving pictures in a few words .
He might observe that it was so .
Emma shall be an angel , and I will keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella .
This was too true for contradiction .
Now , however , it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed , and very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond , a few lines from Frank , to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change , and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty - four hours at any given time , induced them to name as early a day as possible .
This was Mr . Elton !
So obliged to you for the carriage last night .
" They told me -- that Mr . Martin dined with them last Saturday ."
" Well done , Mrs .
Nothing wanting .
my dear ; but so much as Patty has to do !-- And it is a kindness to employ our men ."
Harriet blushed and smiled , and said something about wondering that people should like her so much .
Harriet was silent .
" I wish we could contrive it ," said she ; " but I cannot think of any tolerable pretence for going in ;-- no servant that I want to inquire about of his housekeeper -- no message from my father ."
When the visit was returned , Emma made up her mind .
" Oh !
The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into the adjoining room .
After a few minutes of entire silence between them , John Knightley began with --
His appearance was very neat , and he looked like a sensible young man , but his person had no other advantage ; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen , she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet ' s inclination .
" But will there be good room for five couple ?-- I really do not think there will ."
" Oh !
Well , I wish them happy with all my heart .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
Of their all removing to Donwell , Emma had already had her own passing thoughts .
Can it be woman ?
" I dare say ," returned Harriet , sighing again , " I dare say she was very much attached to him ."
Every thing turns out for his good .-- He meets with a young woman at a watering - place , gains her affection , cannot even weary her by negligent treatment -- and had he and all his family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him , they could not have found her superior .-- His aunt is in the way .-- His aunt dies .-- He has only to speak .-- His friends are eager to promote his happiness .-- He had used every body ill -- and they are all delighted to forgive him .-- He is a fortunate man indeed !"
The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again ; and Miss Smith receiving her summons , was with her without delay , and unattended by any alarming young man .
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
His lady greeted him with some of her sparkling vivacity .
Pray excuse me ; but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy , it cannot be expected that Emma , accountable to nobody but her father , who perfectly approves the acquaintance , should put an end to it , so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself .
Mr . Perry did say so .
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
And , indeed , though my mother ' s eyes are not so good as they were , she can see amazingly well still , thank God !
That ' s right .
Mr . Elton is going to be married ."
To take a dislike to a young man , only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself , was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him ; for with all the high opinion of himself , which she had often laid to his charge , she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another .
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again .
Mr . Weston , do not mistake me .
" Well , Miss Woodhouse !"
You might not see one in a hundred with _gentleman_ so plainly written as in Mr . Knightley .
That young man ( speaking lower ) is very thoughtless .
Dear Harriet !-- I would not change you for the clearest - headed , longest - sighted , best - judging female breathing .
Do not let mine continue longer .
But he laughed so heartily at the recollection , that Emma could not help saying ,
Does Mrs . Churchill do the same ?"
In the hope of diverting her father ' s thoughts from the disagreeableness of Mr . Knightley ' s going to London ; and going so suddenly ; and going on horseback , which she knew would be all very bad ; Emma communicated her news of Jane Fairfax , and her dependence on the effect was justified ; it supplied a very useful check ,-- interested , without disturbing him .
Where shall we see a better daughter , or a kinder sister , or a truer friend ?
Mr . Woodhouse was resigned .
He was soon pretty well resigned .
All the minor arrangements of table and chair , lights and music , tea and supper , made themselves ; or were left as mere trifles to be settled at any time between Mrs . Weston and Mrs .
He must think himself a most agreeable fellow ; I could not do such a thing .
Not more than five couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful , and she found herself well matched in a partner .
She promised him again and again to come -- much oftener than he doubted -- and was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy , such a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it .
He gave her a letter , it was from Frank , and to herself ; he had met with it in his way , and had taken the liberty of opening it .
But between _us_ , I am convinced there never can be any likeness , except in being unmarried ."
We never see any thing of it on our club - nights ."
Mr . Martin is a very respectable young man , but I cannot admit him to be Harriet ' s equal ; and am rather surprized indeed that he should have ventured to address her .
