I thought I had seen you first in February ."
I have been but half a friend to her ; and if she were _not_ to feel this disappointment so very much , I am sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;-- William Coxe -- Oh !
Miss Woodhouse , the comfort of being sometimes alone !"
" Better than she ever used to do ?-- You see how my father and Mrs . Weston doat upon her ."
" No , indeed you are mistaken ."
I never could have an idea of any body else -- and so I thought you knew .
Here , she must be leading a life of privation and penance ; there it would have been all enjoyment .
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration .
no , my love ; but you will soon be tired .
" A man cannot be more so ," was his short , full answer .
" Oh !
By only raising my voice , and saying any thing two or three times over , she is sure to hear ; but then she is used to my voice .
" We will not allow her to do such a thing again :"-- and nodding significantly --" there must be some arrangement made , there must indeed .
It is not in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name of Knightley ."
She was vexed .
She lived with her single daughter in a very small way , and was considered with all the regard and respect which a harmless old lady , under such untoward circumstances , can excite .
Now , my dear madam , I will release you ; but I could not conclude before .
" How do you do , Mrs . Ford ?
By this time , the walk in the rain had reached Mrs . Elton , and her remonstrances now opened upon Jane .
You are the worst judge in the world , Mr . Knightley , of the difficulties of dependence .
" Don ' t class us together , Harriet .
" I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs . Weston .
She knew a family near Maple Grove who had tried it , and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter .
" And here is Mrs . Weston and Mr . Frank Churchill too !-- Quite delightful ; so many friends !"
You see how delightfully she writes .
Oh !
" Me !
" I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling your brother ," cried Emma , " about your friend Mr . Graham ' s intending to have a bailiff from Scotland , to look after his new estate .
A thousand and a thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me , and ten thousand for the attentions your heart will dictate towards her .-- If you think me in a way to be happier than I deserve , I am quite of your opinion .-- Miss W . calls me the child of good fortune .
The two ladies looked over it together ; and he sat smiling and talking to them the whole time , in a voice a little subdued , but very audible to every body .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
They added to their house , to their number of servants , to their expenses of every sort ; and by this time were , in fortune and style of living , second only to the family at Hartfield .
Mr . Elton returned , a very happy man .
She could only give him a look ; but it was such a look as she thought must restore him to his senses , and then left the sofa , removing to a seat by her sister , and giving her all her attention .
He saw a short word prepared for Emma , and given to her with a look sly and demure .
Miss Woodhouse , how ungrateful I have been !"
She went on herself , to give that portion of time to an old servant who was married , and settled in Donwell .
Mr . Churchill would never get over it ."
" It is very pretty ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
The longer she considered it , the greater was her sense of its expediency .
that is quite -- I suppose there never was a piece of news more generally interesting .
` You and I must part .
I knew it was -- but had not resolution enough to part with them ."
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
Every body was punctual , every body in their best looks : not a tear , and hardly a long face to be seen .
" That may be , and I may have seen him fifty times , but without having any idea of his name .
" What news do you mean ?"
Only three of us .-- besides dear Jane at present -- and she really eats nothing -- makes such a shocking breakfast , you would be quite frightened if you saw it .
It then occurred to her to employ him in reading .
The carriage -- we had disappointments about the carriage ;-- one morning , I remember , he came to me quite in despair ."
I wonder what will become of her !"
Men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity -- and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in , when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed .
Composure with a witness !
No , we should not have heard , if it had not been for this particular circumstance , of her being to come here so soon .
He told Patty this , but bid her not mind it , and be sure not to say any thing to us about it , for Mrs . Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes , and as long as so many sacks were sold , it did not signify who ate the remainder .
And now to chuse the mortification of Mrs . Elton ' s notice and the penury of her conversation , rather than return to the superior companions who have always loved her with such real , generous affection ."
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it , extremely good ; and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky , if it had not been for the cruel state of things before , and for the very complete enjoyment and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features announced .
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all -- not once the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows , letting in cold air upon heated bodies , which ( as you well know , sir ) does the mischief ."
I told you he was plain ."
" Well , I believe , if you will excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , I shall take Emma ' s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
How well you put it on !-- so gratified !
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest , his thoughts full of what he had seen ; so full , that when the candles came to assist his observations , he must -- yes , he certainly must , as a friend -- an anxious friend -- give Emma some hint , ask her some question .
That is what she writes about .
Emma encouraged her talkativeness -- amused by such a picture of another set of beings , and enjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation of Mrs . Martin ' s having " _two_ parlours , two very good parlours , indeed ; one of them quite as large as Mrs . Goddard ' s drawing - room ; and of her having an upper maid who had lived five - and - twenty years with her ; and of their having eight cows , two of them Alderneys , and one a little Welch cow , a very pretty little Welch cow indeed ; and of Mrs . Martin ' s saying as she was so fond of it , it should be called _her_ cow ; and of their having a very handsome summer - house in their garden , where some day next year they were all to drink tea :-- a very handsome summer - house , large enough to hold a dozen people ."
Her ideas only varied as to the how much .
" You think I ought to refuse him then ," said Harriet , looking down .
.
By his style , I should imagine it just settled ."
" I have not a fault to find with her person ," he replied .
Were she your equal in situation -- but , Emma , consider how far this is from being the case .
Any thing else I should be most happy to do , at your command -- but my dancing days are over ."
But is not this a sudden scheme ?"
" Take a little time , consider , do not commit yourself ."
" That I am sure you would .
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others , and buried from sight , she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across , for it was not mixed ; and Harriet , eager after every fresh word , and finding out none , directly took it up , and fell to work .
But perhaps he may never have heard of there being such a creature in the world ."
" We are going to Box Hill to - morrow ;-- you will join us .
" I thought he meant to try his skill , by his manner of declining it yesterday ."
Mr . Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer out of Harriet ' s head .
Many circumstances assisted the temptation .
Miss Woodhouse , what can we do about that ?"
The morning of the interesting day arrived , and Mrs . Weston ' s faithful pupil did not forget either at ten , or eleven , or twelve o ' clock , that she was to think of her at four .
She was disgustingly , was suspiciously reserved .
Mrs . Elton ' s invitations I should have imagined any thing but inviting ."
We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all .
He rode down for a couple of hours ; he could not yet do more ; but as he came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield , she could then exercise all her quick observation , and speedily determine how he was influenced , and how she must act .
What do you advise ?"
To understand , thoroughly understand her own heart , was the first endeavour .
It was well that he took every body ' s joy for granted , or he might not have thought either Mr . Woodhouse or Mr . Knightley particularly delighted .
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise ; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_ , on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will , and doing as you were bid ; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife , I should certainly have named Miss Taylor ."
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
He was a married man , with only one living child , a girl , about Jane ' s age : and Jane became their guest , paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all ; and before she was nine years old , his daughter ' s great fondness for her , and his own wish of being a real friend , united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education .
I could have wished , however , as you know , that you had seen Mr . Wingfield before you left home ."
His mother is perfectly right not to be in a hurry .
-- " He was generally thought so ."
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
" How is it possible ?"
Had you witnessed my behaviour there , I can hardly suppose you would ever have thought well of me again .
_Her_ connexions may be worse than _his_ .
And dear Emma , too !-- What a dreadful loss to you both !-- I have been so grieved for you .-- I could not imagine how you could possibly do without her .-- It is a sad change indeed .-- But I hope she is pretty well , sir ."
