" Not at all ," cried he ; " I am much obliged to you for it .
" Have I ?"
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him ; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable .
CHAPTER IV
Mr . Weston is really as kind as herself .
She knew the importance of it , and said every thing in her power to do it away .
" You mistake me , you quite mistake me ," she replied , exerting herself .
Her resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by the addition of a scheme for his subsequent consolation and happiness .
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
I do congratulate you , Mrs . Weston , most warmly .
Nothing , but to grow more worthy of him , whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own .
There was no occasion to press the matter farther .
No , she had had enough of interference .
He could not meet her in conversation , rational or playful .
" And I do envy him , Emma .
in places you see it is dreadfully dirty ; and the wainscot is more yellow and forlorn than any thing I could have imagined ."
But she probably had something of that in her thoughts , when alluding to the misunderstandings which he had given us hints of before .
" You could not have visited me !"
CHAPTER XII
The house belonged to people in business .
Knightley .--" Emma , that I fear is a word -- No , I have no wish -- Stay , yes , why should I hesitate ?-- I have gone too far already for concealment .-- Emma , I accept your offer -- Extraordinary as it may seem , I accept it , and refer myself to you as a friend .-- Tell me , then , have I no chance of ever succeeding ?"
To give up one ' s child !
" I should not wonder ," said Mrs . Weston , " if Miss Fairfax were to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination , by her aunt ' s eagerness in accepting Mrs . Elton ' s civilities for her .
said Mrs . Weston , " have not you finished it yet ?
He did not boast , but it naturally betrayed itself , that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing , and on her laughing and noticing it , he owned that he believed ( excepting one or two points ) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing .
The contrast between Mrs . Churchill ' s importance in the world , and Jane Fairfax ' s , struck her ; one was every thing , the other nothing -- and she sat musing on the difference of woman ' s destiny , and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed , till roused by Miss Bates ' s saying ,
He knew of no one but Mrs . Goddard to whom he could apply for information of her relations or friends .
Emma laughed , and replied : " But I had the assistance of all your endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people .
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
And how much may be said in her situation for even that error !"
There is always some talent in it .
Don ' t let us be severe , don ' t let us be in a hurry to condemn him .
In what respect ?
But the sight of Mr . Knightley among the most attentive , soon drew away half Emma ' s mind ; and she fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs . Weston ' s suspicions , to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions .
Nothing was wanting but to be happy when they got there .
Knightley ."
Do not you pity me ?"
She could not speak another word .-- Her voice was lost ; and she sat down , waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer .
" It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four - and - twenty should not have liberty of mind or limb to that amount .
" Mrs . Elton , I suppose , has been the person to whom Miss Fairfax owes --"
Mr . Weston is rather an easy , cheerful - tempered man , than a man of strong feelings ; he takes things as he finds them , and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other , depending , I suspect , much more upon what is called society for his comforts , that is , upon the power of eating and drinking , and playing whist with his neighbours five times a week , than upon family affection , or any thing that home affords ."
then , don ' t speak it , don ' t speak it ," she eagerly cried .
" Mr . Wingfield most strenuously recommended it , sir -- or we should not have gone .
I never was more surprized -- but it does not make me unhappy , I assure you .-- How -- how has it been possible ?"
" Ought to refuse him !
What were nine miles to a young man ?-- An hour ' s ride .
And so excellent in the Church !
You are not afraid of being supposed ashamed .
" Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment ."
She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfect confidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty .
Mr . Weston , on his side , added a virtue to the account which must have some weight .
really , never !-- Bless me !
said she , with a conscious look .
thought Emma , " he would have done as much for Harriet ."
Such an immense plantation all round it !
While he lived , it must be only an engagement ; but she flattered herself , that if divested of the danger of drawing her away , it might become an increase of comfort to him .-- How to do her best by Harriet , was of more difficult decision ;-- how to spare her from any unnecessary pain ; how to make her any possible atonement ; how to appear least her enemy ?-- On these subjects , her perplexity and distress were very great -- and her mind had to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it .-- She could only resolve at last , that she would still avoid a meeting with her , and communicate all that need be told by letter ; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to have her removed just now for a time from Highbury , and -- indulging in one scheme more -- nearly resolve , that it might be practicable to get an invitation for her to Brunswick Square .-- Isabella had been pleased with Harriet ; and a few weeks spent in London must give her some amusement .-- She did not think it in Harriet ' s nature to escape being benefited by novelty and variety , by the streets , the shops , and the children .-- At any rate , it would be a proof of attention and kindness in herself , from whom every thing was due ; a separation for the present ; an averting of the evil day , when they must all be together again .
And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear her in any thing else .
He made no answer ; merely looked , and bowed in submission ; and soon afterwards said , in a lively tone ,
As far as good intentions went , we were _both_ right , and I must say that no effects on my side of the argument have yet proved wrong .
Harriet certainly was not clever , but she had a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , was totally free from conceit , and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to .
" No , I am sure it is not from the Campbells .
I cannot really change for the better .
" And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means certain .
The confession completely renewed her first shame -- and the sight of Harriet ' s tears made her think that she should never be in charity with herself again .
These were pleasant feelings , and she walked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did , and collect round the strawberry - beds .-- The whole party were assembled , excepting Frank Churchill , who was expected every moment from Richmond ; and Mrs . Elton , in all her apparatus of happiness , her large bonnet and her basket , was very ready to lead the way in gathering , accepting , or talking -- strawberries , and only strawberries , could now be thought or spoken of .--" The best fruit in England -- every body ' s favourite -- always wholesome .-- These the finest beds and finest sorts .-- Delightful to gather for one ' s self -- the only way of really enjoying them .-- Morning decidedly the best time -- never tired -- every sort good -- hautboy infinitely superior -- no comparison -- the others hardly eatable -- hautboys very scarce -- Chili preferred -- white wood finest flavour of all -- price of strawberries in London -- abundance about Bristol -- Maple Grove -- cultivation -- beds when to be renewed -- gardeners thinking exactly different -- no general rule -- gardeners never to be put out of their way -- delicious fruit -- only too rich to be eaten much of -- inferior to cherries -- currants more refreshing -- only objection to gathering strawberries the stooping -- glaring sun -- tired to death -- could bear it no longer -- must go and sit in the shade ."
No doubt it had been from jealousy .-- In Jane ' s eyes she had been a rival ; and well might any thing she could offer of assistance or regard be repulsed .
Jane she had a distinct glimpse of , looking extremely ill ; and , before the door had shut them out , she heard Miss Bates saying , " Well , my dear , I shall _say_ you are laid down upon the bed , and I am sure you are ill enough ."
You had it from himself , had you ?"
" No , certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of the evening ."
Her fancy was very active .
Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell .
If you prefer Mr . Martin to every other person ; if you think him the most agreeable man you have ever been in company with , why should you hesitate ?
" Oh !
I certainly get better and better .-- Now for it ."
Now , here will be Mr . Elton and Miss Hawkins ; and there are the Coles , such very good people ; and the Perrys -- I suppose there never was a happier or a better couple than Mr . and Mrs . Perry .
They were all three walking about together for an hour or two -- first round the shrubberies of Hartfield , and afterwards in Highbury .
CHAPTER XIII
Remember ."
Mrs . Churchill , after being disliked at least twenty - five years , was now spoken of with compassionate allowances .
That ' s one of the ladies in the Irish car party , not at all like her .-- Well , I declare --"
It was enough for her to feel .
It would be an interesting , and certainly a very kind undertaking ; highly becoming her own situation in life , her leisure , and powers .
You appear to me a little hoarse already , and when you consider what demand of voice and what fatigues to - morrow will bring , I think it would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care of yourself to - night ."
These kind of things are very well at Christmas , when one is sitting round the fire ; but quite out of place , in my opinion , when one is exploring about the country in summer .
And so Patty told me , and I was excessively shocked indeed !
There was no bearing such an " always ;" and to break through her dreadful gratitude , Emma made the direct inquiry of --
They should lose her ; and , probably , in great measure , her husband also .-- Frank Churchill would return among them no more ; and Miss Fairfax , it was reasonable to suppose , would soon cease to belong to Highbury .
" That ' s true ," she cried --" very true .
John Knightley looked at him with amazement , then shrugged his shoulders , and said , " I could not have believed it even of _him_ ."
" I shall not scold you .
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be expected ; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits , which appeared perfectly natural , as there was a dentist to be consulted ; but , since that business had been over , she did not appear to find Harriet different from what she had known her before .-- Isabella , to be sure , was no very quick observer ; yet if Harriet had not been equal to playing with the children , it would not have escaped her .
" Why do you smile ?"
" I am perfectly satisfied ," replied Emma , with the brightest smiles , " and most sincerely wish them happy ."
Fairfax of the _______ regiment of infantry , and Miss Jane Bates , had had its day of fame and pleasure , hope and interest ; but nothing now remained of it , save the melancholy remembrance of him dying in action abroad -- of his widow sinking under consumption and grief soon afterwards -- and this girl .
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
I have no objections at all to meeting the Hartfield family .
She is loveliness itself .
then , said I , I must run across , I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in ; my mother will be so very happy to see her -- and now we are such a nice party , she cannot refuse .--` Aye , pray do ,' said Mr . Frank Churchill , ` Miss Woodhouse ' s opinion of the instrument will be worth having .'
Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs . Weston .
