" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr . Elton ' s marrying , Harriet , is the strongest reproach you can make _me_ .
It opens his designs to his family , it introduces you among them , it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of our nature , eager curiosity and warm prepossession .
" Not at all , sir .
" No , no , that ' s to - morrow ; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley to - day on that very account .-- Such a dreadful broiling morning !-- I went over the fields too --( speaking in a tone of great ill - usage ,) which made it so much the worse .
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind : I really believe , if she had only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ; and nobody is afraid of her : that is a great charm ."
It was a right thing to do .
He does not think of the draught .
here it comes .
" No ," said Mr . Knightley , nearly at the same time ; " you are not often deficient ; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension .
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ; but still they were to part .
I hardly ever get a letter ."
" How odd you are !
" This is too bad ," cried Emma , as they turned away .
" Certainly ," replied he , surprized , " I do not absolutely know it ; but it may be inferred .
She was not obliged to hear .
It was badly done , indeed !
Quite delightful to have you all meet so !-- Our little room so honoured !"
The aunt was a capricious woman , and governed her husband entirely ; but it was not in Mr . Weston ' s nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear , and , as he believed , so deservedly dear .
Miss Hawkins ,-- I dare say , an excellent young woman .
Emma and Harriet went together ; Miss Bates and her niece , with the Eltons ; the gentlemen on horseback .
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
He started .
" How you can bear such recollections , is astonishing to me !-- They _will_ sometimes obtrude -- but how you can court them !"
He has imposed on me , but he has not injured me .
" Thank you .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to - day , and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sore throat herself .
" We consider our Hartfield pork ," replied Mr . Woodhouse --" indeed it certainly is , so very superior to all other pork , that Emma and I cannot have a greater pleasure than --"
Short of that , it is all guess and luck -- and will generally be ill - luck .
What a thinking brain you have !
What are you proud of ?
" Did she know ?-- had she heard any thing about her , since their being at Randalls ?-- he felt much anxiety -- he must confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably ."
Captain Weston was a general favourite ; and when the chances of his military life had introduced him to Miss Churchill , of a great Yorkshire family , and Miss Churchill fell in love with him , nobody was surprized , except her brother and his wife , who had never seen him , and who were full of pride and importance , which the connexion would offend .
Elton ' s absence just at this time was the very thing to be desired .
That will be very bad ."
" Christmas weather ," observed Mr . Elton .
She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please , and given all the consequence she could wish for .
"-- Mrs . Weston , I suppose ," interrupted Mrs . Elton , rather mortified .
Bless me !
Oh !
Emma was almost too much astonished to answer ; but Mrs . Elton hardly waited for the affirmative before she went on .
She would be such a delightful companion for Emma ."
" You certainly will meet them if I can prevail ; and I shall call on Miss Bates in my way home ."
And it is no small credit , in my opinion , to him , that he should excite such an affection ; for , though I would not say it to any body else , she has no more heart than a stone to people in general ; and the devil of a temper ."
The weather affected Mr . Woodhouse , and he could only be kept tolerably comfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter ' s side , and by exertions which had never cost her half so much before .
She was immediately up , and wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also moving , that she could not get away ; and Mr . Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her , and resolutely swept away by her unexamined .
It was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject , and he said ,
They can do nothing satisfactorily without you ."
" I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_ ," said she .-- " In not one of all my clever replies , my delicate negatives , is there any allusion to making a sacrifice .
" So prettily done !
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins ' s name was first mentioned in Highbury , before she was , by some means or other , discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when Mr . Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her Christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
Oh !
" Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can while my brother and sister are here .
I can think of but one thing -- Who is in love with her ?
" I do think it is , without exception , the best charade I ever read ."
I will move a little farther off ."
" Well , well , means to make her an offer then .
He had , in fact , been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence .
" I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield ," said he , at the conclusion .
my dear , it is not like Hartfield .
" Ah !
Elton ?"
I wonder how she speaks of the Coles -- what she calls them !
Till you chose to turn her into a friend , her mind had no distaste for her own set , nor any ambition beyond it .
His spirits required support .
My dear Emma , your own good sense could not endure such a puppy when it came to the point ."
She spoke as she felt , with earnest regret and solicitude -- sincerely wishing that the circumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determined on , might be as much for Miss Fairfax ' s advantage and comfort as possible .
" Well , he is coming , you see ; good news , I think .
I said to my mother , ` Upon my word , ma ' am --.'
Somebody said that _Miss_ Gilbert was expected at her brother ' s , and must be invited with the rest .
And ever since she was twelve , Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all .
And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded .
The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration .
I give you notice -- You will find me a formidable antagonist on that point .
asked Mr . Knightley .
I have heard him say that he could listen to her for ever .
By the bye , _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceit with a niece .
I do not believe I did you any good .
It is too unlikely , for me to believe it without proof ."
Woodhouse , who had already taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens , where no damps from the river were imagined even by him , stirred no more ; and his daughter resolved to remain with him , that Mrs . Weston might be persuaded away by her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need .
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
.
But what is the meaning of this ?
Mr . Knightley himself would be doing nothing to assist the cure ;-- not like Mr . Elton .
-- What does this mean ?
She is still nearer .-- And I do not know whether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the rest of the people as any body .
You would not have been so long in coming , if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury ."
They met readily and smiling , but with a consciousness which at first allowed little to be said ; and having all sat down again , there was for some time such a blank in the circle , that Emma began to doubt whether the wish now indulged , which she had long felt , of seeing Frank Churchill once more , and of seeing him with Jane , would yield its proportion of pleasure .
But the question is not , whether it would be a bad connexion for him , but whether he wishes it ; and I think he does .
Who cried most ?"
It would be a disappointment to my father -- and altogether -- I do not know that -- I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very well ."
" Imprudent , if you please -- but not mad .
I do not recommend matrimony at present to Emma , though I mean no slight to the state , I assure you ."
You were very popular before you came , because you were Mr . Weston ' s son -- but lay out half a guinea at Ford ' s , and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues ."
` Have you , upon your honour ?'
" My friend Mr . Perry !
They are very important -- and sorry I am that you cannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them .
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
She was sure of Mrs . Weston ' s wishing it to be communicated ; especially to one , who , like Mr . Knightley , had seen so much to blame in his conduct .
My mother desires her very best compliments and regards , and a thousand thanks , and says you really quite oppress her ."
