This , on his side , might merely proceed from her not being thought of ; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy , and a suspicion , from some appearances , that their friendship were declining .
I am doatingly fond of music -- passionately fond ;-- and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste ; but as to any thing else , upon my honour my performance is _mediocre_ to the last degree .
Quick and decided in her ways , Emma lost no time in inviting , encouraging , and telling her to come very often ; and as their acquaintance increased , so did their satisfaction in each other .
Harriet was to sit again the next day ; and Mr . Elton , just as he ought , entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again .
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day .-- Shocking plan , living together .
she was as grateful as possible , you may be sure .
I could have wished , however , as you know , that you had seen Mr . Wingfield before you left home ."
The gruel came and supplied a great deal to be said -- much praise and many comments -- undoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution , and pretty severe Philippics upon the many houses where it was never met with tolerable ;-- but , unfortunately , among the failures which the daughter had to instance , the most recent , and therefore most prominent , was in her own cook at South End , a young woman hired for the time , who never had been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice smooth gruel , thin , but not too thin .
" But she is so amusing , so extremely amusing !
Emma seriously hoped she would .
Surprizes are foolish things .
South End is an unhealthy place .
He must have a pretty good opinion of himself ."
` Well ,' said she , ` it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now .'
he continued ; " every day more precious and more delightful than the day before !-- every day making me less fit to bear any other place .
" You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am ; but still you must , at least I hope you must , think the better of him for it .
" And , in return for your acknowledging so much , I will do you the justice to say , that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen for himself .-- Harriet Smith has some first - rate qualities , which Mrs . Elton is totally without .
How unlucky !
I shall certainly be at leisure ."
Nothing hastily done ; nothing incomplete .
Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax ' s situation in life .
" Does nothing occur to you ?-- Do not you recollect ?-- Harriet Smith ."
" And the staircase -- You know , as I came in , I observed how very like the staircase was ; placed exactly in the same part of the house .
She dearly loved her father , but he was no companion for her .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
" Where could you possibly hear it , Mr . Knightley ?
" Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old .
Mr . Elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
" I have made a most wretched discovery ," said he , after a short pause .-- " I have been here a week to - morrow -- half my time .
No , Mr . Knightley , do not foretell vexation from that quarter ."
I have not forgotten it , I assure you .-- Deceived myself , I did very miserably deceive you -- and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever .
No coffee , I thank you , for me -- never take coffee .-- A little tea if you please , sir , by and bye ,-- no hurry -- Oh !
Thank you , we do indeed .
No , I would not be the means of giving them any pain .
no , no "-- cried Emma , laughing as carelessly as she could -- " Upon no account in the world .
how so ?
He was to leave them early the next day ; and he soon began with --
His visit he would now defer ; but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done and should be done .
But poor Harriet was such an engrossing charge !
It must not be : and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance !--
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
" Me !-- oh !
" I hope every body had a pleasant evening ," said Mr . Woodhouse , in his quiet way .
are you there ?-- But you are miserably behindhand .
if you had seen her , as I did , when she was at the worst !"
The shower was heavy , but short ; and it had not been over five minutes , when in came Harriet , with just the heated , agitated look which hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give ; and the " Oh !
If not wise or refined herself , she would have connected him with those who were ; but Miss Hawkins , it might be fairly supposed from her easy conceit , had been the best of her own set .
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
There is no use in delay .
" Why do you smile ?"
" Shall I ring the bell ?"
It was kindly said , and very far from giving offence .
" Upon my word , Emma ."
But never did she go without Mr . Woodhouse ' s giving a gentle sigh , and saying , " Ah , poor Miss Taylor !
I never saw such a likeness ."
" He is a person I never think of from one month ' s end to another ," said Mr . Knightley , with a degree of vexation , which made Emma immediately talk of something else , though she could not comprehend why he should be angry .
dear , yes ," before the gentleman joined them .
" Then pray stay at Richmond ."
Be sure to give me intelligence of the letter as soon as possible ."
Your description of Mrs . Churchill made me think of them directly .
Emma listened , and then coolly said , " I shall not be satisfied , unless he comes ."
You will never go to Swisserland .
-- seemed to burst from an overcharged heart , and to describe somewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her , even towards some of those who loved her best .
He had ridden home through the rain ; and had walked up directly after dinner , to see how this sweetest and best of all creatures , faultless in spite of all her faults , bore the discovery .
say beautiful rather .
After some attempts , therefore , to be permitted to begin again , they were obliged to thank Mrs . Weston , look sorrowful , and have done .
where shall we sit ?
For two or three months longer I shall remain where I am , and as I am ."
This is in the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is ; but I do not know that I expect it will ; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man -- I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy .-- His feelings are warm , but I can imagine them rather changeable .-- Every consideration of the subject , in short , makes me thankful that my happiness is not more deeply involved .-- I shall do very well again after a little while -- and then , it will be a good thing over ; for they say every body is in love once in their lives , and I shall have been let off easily ."
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was already made , and could not but hope that the gipsy , though she had _told_ no fortune , might be proved to have made Harriet ' s .-- About a fortnight after the alarm , they came to a sufficient explanation , and quite undesignedly .
Emma sat with her as long as she could , to attend her in Mrs . Goddard ' s unavoidable absences , and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr . Elton ' s would be depressed when he knew her state ; and left her at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit , and of their all missing her very much .
Harriet exactly .
He seems every thing the fondest parent could .
He was the son of Mr . Weston -- he was continually here -- I always found him very pleasant -- and , in short , for ( with a sigh ) let me swell out the causes ever so ingeniously , they all centre in this at last -- my vanity was flattered , and I allowed his attentions .
The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma , in a note from Mrs . Weston , instantly .
To talk would be only to irritate .-- She wrote to her , therefore , kindly , but decisively , to beg that she would not , at present , come to Hartfield ; acknowledging it to be her conviction , that all farther confidential discussion of _one_ topic had better be avoided ; and hoping , that if a few days were allowed to pass before they met again , except in the company of others -- she objected only to a tete - a - tete -- they might be able to act as if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday .-- Harriet submitted , and approved , and was grateful .
The heat even would be danger .-- You are fatigued already ."
Had the same behaviour continued , Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views ; not being aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of .
It would be a great disappointment to Mr . John Knightley ; consequently to Isabella .
Mr . Knightley was fortunate in every body ' s most ready concurrence .
" Well , I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does , or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out .
He had the air of congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to Highbury , as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal ; and the greater part of her new acquaintance , disposed to commend , or not in the habit of judging , following the lead of Miss Bates ' s good - will , or taking it for granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she professed herself , were very well satisfied ; so that Mrs . Elton ' s praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do , unimpeded by Miss Woodhouse , who readily continued her first contribution and talked with a good grace of her being " very pleasant and very elegantly dressed ."
" Well , I believe , if you will excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , I shall take Emma ' s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
" I did not mean , I was not thinking of the slave - trade ," replied Jane ; " governess - trade , I assure you , was all that I had in view ; widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the victims , I do not know where it lies .
" More than an attachment , indeed ," resumed Mrs . Weston ; " an engagement -- a positive engagement .-- What will you say , Emma -- what will any body say , when it is known that Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax are engaged ;-- nay , that they have been long engaged !"
Command yourself enough to say no more , and I will endeavour to forget it ."
One has not great hopes from Birmingham .
I hope we shall have her here next week .
I have a very strong notion that it comes from him .
It will not be so great a loss of time : but if you dislike it --"
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with spirit .
-- What does this mean ?
The woman was better off ; she might have the assistance of fine clothes , and the privilege of bashfulness , but the man had only his own good sense to depend on ; and when she considered how peculiarly unlucky poor Mr . Elton was in being in the same room at once with the woman he had just married , the woman he had wanted to marry , and the woman whom he had been expected to marry , she must allow him to have the right to look as little wise , and to be as much affectedly , and as little really easy as could be .
" That ' s quite unnecessary ; I see Jane every day :-- but as you like .
Nothing could be pleasanter .
We shall only be making each other more angry .
However , I do not mean to set up my opinion against your ' s -- and I am sure I shall not wish for the acquaintance of his wife .
He was very much vexed .
Harriet had not been at home ; but a note had been prepared and left for her , written in the very style to touch ; a small mixture of reproach , with a great deal of kindness ; and till Mr . Elton himself appeared , she had been much occupied by it , continually pondering over what could be done in return , and wishing to do more than she dared to confess .
