It is a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire ."
" You are not vain , Mr . Knightley .
She could see nothing but evil in it .
" Well !
Two days of joyful security were immediately followed by the over - throw of every thing .
But then there is not so clever a man any where ."
CHAPTER XII
" Ah !
" I dare say you would ; but I , simple I , saw nothing but the fact , that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr . Dixon caught her .-- It was the work of a moment .
It is the fault of her face that she has them not ."
Every thing was to take its natural course , however , neither impelled nor assisted .
But there was no doing any thing , with Mr . Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch .
She was warmly gratified -- and in another moment still more so , by a little movement of more than common friendliness on his part .-- He took her hand ;-- whether she had not herself made the first motion , she could not say -- she might , perhaps , have rather offered it -- but he took her hand , pressed it , and certainly was on the point of carrying it to his lips -- when , from some fancy or other , he suddenly let it go .-- Why he should feel such a scruple , why he should change his mind when it was all but done , she could not perceive .-- He would have judged better , she thought , if he had not stopped .-- The intention , however , was indubitable ; and whether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry , or however else it happened , but she thought nothing became him more .-- It was with him , of so simple , yet so dignified a nature .-- She could not but recall the attempt with great satisfaction .
" That sweet , amiable Jane Fairfax !"
Frank Churchill , of whom , in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs . Weston , she had been seeing nothing , except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax , followed Mr . Cole , to add his very pressing entreaties ; and as , in every respect , it suited Emma best to lead , she gave a very proper compliance .
Well , Miss Woodhouse , is he like what you expected ?
" I have escaped ; and that I should escape , may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself .
Don ' t disturb him .
Emma ' s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken the following day , by hearing that he was gone off to London , merely to have his hair cut .
" I mentioned no _names_ , you will observe .-- Oh !
The tone implied some old acquaintance -- and how could she possibly guess ?
" Then it would not be so strong a sense .
or is it too short ?"
" I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly ; oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would , in the common course of things , occur to him ."
Soon afterwards he began again ,
So very good of them to send her the whole way !
What ever she might feel of brighter hope , she betrayed nothing .
They were looking over views in Swisserland .
" I would rather be talking to you ," he replied ; " but as it seems a matter of justice , it shall be done ."
And as to my dear little boys , I must say , that if Aunt Emma has not time for them , I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley , who is absent from home about five hours where she is absent one -- and who , when he is at home , is either reading to himself or settling his accounts ."
Elton !-- The stain of illegitimacy , unbleached by nobility or wealth , would have been a stain indeed .
And Jane declares -- Well !--( as soon as she was within the door ) Well !
I wonder how she speaks of the Coles -- what she calls them !
It was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits , and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it .
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter ' s marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off , Emma found time , in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her voice and her taste , to look about , and see what became of Mr . Knightley .
What nonsense one talks , Miss Woodhouse , when hard at work , if one talks at all ;-- your real workmen , I suppose , hold their tongues ; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word -- Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing .
He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment .
It was a union of the highest promise of felicity in itself , and without one real , rational difficulty to oppose or delay it .
You must grant me that ."
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
" Oh !
She was as happy as possible with the Martins in the summer .
The consciousness of having done amiss , had exposed her to a thousand inquietudes , and made her captious and irritable to a degree that must have been -- that had been -- hard for him to bear .
" So prettily done !
He knows the value of a good income as well as any body .
They had received her doubtingly , if not coolly ; and nothing beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time -- till just at last , when Mrs . Martin ' s saying , all of a sudden , that she thought Miss Smith was grown , had brought on a more interesting subject , and a warmer manner .
There are places in town , offices , where inquiry would soon produce something -- Offices for the sale -- not quite of human flesh -- but of human intellect ."
The corner of the sofa is very good .
It could be protracted no longer .
" Oh !
What a letter the man writes !"
They arrived .-- Mrs .
Where is it ?
I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment ; that considering the service he had rendered you , it was extremely natural :-- and you agreed to it , expressing yourself very warmly as to your sense of that service , and mentioning even what your sensations had been in seeing him come forward to your rescue .-- The impression of it is strong on my memory ."
" But there may be pretty good guessing .
It is not likely that I _should_ , considering what I have been used to .
How very odd !"
I hope you will be pleased with my son ; but you must not expect a prodigy .
Emma listened with the warmest concern ; grieved for her more and more , and looked around eager to discover some way of being useful .
" Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax !"
I have taken some pains for your sake , and for Robert Martin ' s sake , ( whom I have always had reason to believe as much in love with her as ever ,) to get acquainted with her .
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
His coming to visit his father had been often talked of but never achieved .
And it was spoken with a sort of sighing animation , which had a vast deal of the lover .
The wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma ' s thoughts all the evening .
A complete change of life became desirable .
The information was , as you state , that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins .
And as for Harriet , I will venture to say that _she_ cannot gain by the acquaintance .
I can never bear to think of you all there without me ."
May is the very month which Mrs . Churchill is ordered , or has ordered herself , to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe -- in short , to spend in London ; so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring -- precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen for it : days almost at the longest ; weather genial and pleasant , always inviting one out , and never too hot for exercise .
and once Henry asked me for a knife , but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas .
I should like it of all things ," was not plainer in words than manner .
I have engaged Mrs . Weston to correspond with me .
But do not imagine that I want to influence you ."
With respect to her father , it was a question soon answered .
All was safe and prosperous ; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way for another , Emma , being now certain of her ball , began to adopt as the next vexation Mr . Knightley ' s provoking indifference about it .
Who could have seen through such thick - headed nonsense ?
I congratulate you , my dear Harriet , with all my heart .
And , after proceeding a few steps , she added -- " I stopped you ungraciously , just now , Mr . Knightley , and , I am afraid , gave you pain .-- But if you have any wish to speak openly to me as a friend , or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have in contemplation -- as a friend , indeed , you may command me .-- I will hear whatever you like .
And such a noble fire !-- I am quite roasted .
Oh no !
" No , not at Randalls ; I have not been near Randalls ," when the door was thrown open , and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room .
To walk by the side of this child , and talk to and question her , was the most natural thing in the world , or would have been the most natural , had she been acting just then without design ; and by this means the others were still able to keep ahead , without any obligation of waiting for her .
Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution it produced : as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls , she closed with the offer of that officious Mrs . Elton ; the whole system of whose treatment of her , by the bye , has ever filled me with indignation and hatred .
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
He always moved with the alertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory , but now he seemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance .
The " How d ' ye do ' s " were quiet and constrained on each side .
To know that he has not thrown himself away , is such a comfort !-- She does seem a charming young woman , just what he deserves .
In the few minutes ' conversation which she had yet had with him , while Harriet had been partially insensible , he had spoken of her terror , her naivete , her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm , with a sensibility amused and delighted ; and just at last , after Harriet ' s own account had been given , he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of Miss Bickerton in the warmest terms .
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter ' s marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
They might chuse to surprize her ."
I should have expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell ."
He had not left her long , by no means long enough for her to have the slightest inclination for thinking of any body else , when a letter was brought her from Randalls -- a very thick letter ;-- she guessed what it must contain , and deprecated the necessity of reading it .-- She was now in perfect charity with Frank Churchill ; she wanted no explanations , she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself -- and as for understanding any thing he wrote , she was sure she was incapable of it .-- It must be waded through , however .
Exactly so .
Depend upon it , he would not like to have his charade slighted , much better than his passion .
A dinner there must be .
