Are you in any doubt as to that ?
Selina , who is mild almost to a fault , bore with them much better ."
This discovery laid many smaller matters open .
Five couple are nothing , when one thinks seriously about it .
Very happy to hear it .
An injunction of secresy had been among Mr . Weston ' s parting words .
he could ride to London at any time .
well , that must be infinitely provoking !
" You are right , Mrs . Weston ," said Mr . Knightley warmly , " Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion of Mrs . Elton .
Would not Harriet be the very creature described ?
On that article , truth seemed attainable .
If Jane does not get well soon , we will call in Mr . Perry .
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction , comfort , and delight to me , to hear what a musical society I am got into .
She must understand you ."
She was happy , she knew she was happy , and knew she ought to be happy .
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !-- I believe we drive faster than any body .-- What a pleasure it is to send one ' s carriage for a friend !-- I understand you were so kind as to offer , but another time it will be quite unnecessary .
but what shall you do ?
If Emma had still , at intervals , an anxious feeling for Harriet , a momentary doubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr . Knightley , and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination , it was not long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any such uncertainty .
" But , my dear papa , it is supposed to be summer ; a warm day in summer .
I think you must know Hartfield enough to comprehend that ."
I hope he may long continue to feel all the value of such a reconciliation .-- He is a very liberal thanker , with his thousands and tens of thousands .--` Happier than I deserve .'
After a good many compliments to Jane on her dress and look , compliments very quietly and properly taken , Mrs . Elton was evidently wanting to be complimented herself -- and it was , " How do you like my gown ?-- How do you like my trimming ?-- How has Wright done my hair ?"
" Exactly so ; that is what principally strikes me .
I know you are attached to them ."
I would not have Mr . Knightley know any thing about it for the world !
She felt that , in quitting Donwell , he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits ; that in living constantly with her father , and in no house of his own , there would be much , very much , to be borne with .
He will be so pleased to see my little ones ."
Can I do any thing for you ?"
To amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for -- and Emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could very well describe .
Dixon is very musical , is he ?
" I am not at all surprized at you , Harriet .
said she , beginning again when they were all in the street .
Miss Fairfax knows it is not from the Campbells , or they would have been guessed at first .
The loss of the ball -- the loss of the young man -- and all that the young man might be feeling !-- It was too wretched !-- Such a delightful evening as it would have been !-- Every body so happy !
Of their all removing to Donwell , Emma had already had her own passing thoughts .
" Pray , Emma ," said he , " may I ask in what lay the great amusement , the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax ?
If _she_ had so misinterpreted his feelings , she had little right to wonder that _he_ , with self - interest to blind him , should have mistaken hers .
" Oh !
The like reserve prevailed on other topics .
" I do not admire it ," said Mr . Knightley .
" And then their uncle comes in , and tosses them up to the ceiling in a very frightful way !"
" Is not this most vexations , Knightley ?"
And the distinction is not quite so much against the candour and common sense of the world as appears at first ; for a very narrow income has a tendency to contract the mind , and sour the temper .
I am very happy .
" You will make my excuses , my dear , as civilly as possible .
She must see you ."
The rest of the day , the following night , were hardly enough for her thoughts .-- She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushed on her within the last few hours .
We really seem quite the fashion .
" Oh !
They hardly can satisfy a woman of her good sense and quick feelings : standing in a mother ' s place , but without a mother ' s affection to blind her .
He had walked up one day after dinner , as he very often did , to spend his evening at Hartfield .
" Well ," said she at last , trying to recover herself ; " this is a circumstance which I must think of at least half a day , before I can at all comprehend it .
Elton , before she could be spoken to , was ready ; and before Mr . Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be allowed to hand her into the dining - parlour , was saying --
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing ; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills .
I must put on a few ornaments now , because it is expected of me .
" What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be !
He paused .-- She coloured and laughed .--" I know you saw my letter , and think you may remember my wish in your favour .
I can only say that there was smoothness outwardly .
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply : and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr . Elton ' s sanguine state of mind , he tried to take her hand again , as he joyously exclaimed --
Wax - candles in the schoolroom !
" Dear me !-- it is so odd to hear a woman talk so !"
Anywhere , so that Jane is not in a draught .
Did you ever hear any thing so strange ?
The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration .
Elton ."
Is not she an angel in every gesture ?
You will say that I am quite an invalid , and go no where , and therefore must decline their obliging invitation ; beginning with my _compliments_ , of course .
Mr . Frank Churchill did not come .
There is something so shocking in a child ' s being taken away from his parents and natural home !
I do not believe I did you any good .
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
" Oh !
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
And I think she feels it .
Miss Woodhouse , what a pity that I must not write this beautiful charade into my book !
John Knightley only was in mute astonishment .-- That a man who might have spent his evening quietly at home after a day of business in London , should set off again , and walk half a mile to another man ' s house , for the sake of being in mixed company till bed - time , of finishing his day in the efforts of civility and the noise of numbers , was a circumstance to strike him deeply .
She hesitated a moment , and then replied , " With you , if you will ask me ."
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma ; and as soon as Miss Bates was quiet , she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs . Elton and Miss Fairfax , who were standing a little way behind her .-- He was thoughtful .
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
Happy those , who can remain at Highbury !"
" Upon my word , Emma , to hear you abusing the reason you have , is almost enough to make me think so too .
" No great variety of faces for you ," said Emma .
.
Mr . Weston would take no denial ; they must all dine at Randalls one day ;-- even Mr . Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of the party .
" Oh yes !-- that is , no -- I do not know -- but I believe he has read a good deal -- but not what you would think any thing of .
.
There was little sympathy to be spared for any body else .
He agreed to it , but with so quiet a " Yes ," as inclined her almost to doubt his real concurrence ; and yet there must be a very distinct sort of elegance for the fashionable world , if Jane Fairfax could be thought only ordinarily gifted with it .
" You would not have encouraged me , then , if you had understood me ?
She proved to be the daughter of a tradesman , rich enough to afford her the comfortable maintenance which had ever been hers , and decent enough to have always wished for concealment .-- Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerly been so ready to vouch for !-- It was likely to be as untainted , perhaps , as the blood of many a gentleman : but what a connexion had she been preparing for Mr . Knightley -- or for the Churchills -- or even for Mr .
Mr . Elton knows you ."
I like old friends ; and Miss Jane Fairfax is a very pretty sort of young lady , a very pretty and a very well - behaved young lady indeed .
-- You always called me , ` Mr . Knightley ;' and , from habit , it has not so very formal a sound .-- And yet it is formal .
And this belief produced another dread .
said Emma playfully .
Oh !
You are too bountiful !
" Well , I have so little confidence in my own judgment , that whenever I marry , I hope some body will chuse my wife for me .
" I believe it is very true , my dear , indeed ," said Mr . Woodhouse , with a sigh .
She appeared to me to play well , that is , with considerable taste , but I know nothing of the matter myself .-- I am excessively fond of music , but without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body ' s performance .-- I have been used to hear her ' s admired ; and I remember one proof of her being thought to play well :-- a man , a very musical man , and in love with another woman -- engaged to her -- on the point of marriage -- would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrument , if the lady in question could sit down instead -- never seemed to like to hear one if he could hear the other .
