She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith ' s conversation , but she found her altogether very engaging -- not inconveniently shy , not unwilling to talk -- and yet so far from pushing , shewing so proper and becoming a deference , seeming so pleasantly grateful for being admitted to Hartfield , and so artlessly impressed by the appearance of every thing in so superior a style to what she had been used to , that she must have good sense , and deserve encouragement .
CHAPTER IV
Nonsense !
CHAPTER XI
" So extremely like Maple Grove !
Your dear mother was so clever at all those things !
As a walking companion , Emma had very early foreseen how useful she might find her .
There is an anxiety , a curiosity in what one feels for Emma .
Mr . Woodhouse hesitated .--" Not near so often , my dear , as I could wish ."
You do not think I could mean _you_ , or suppose Mr . Knightley to mean _you_ .
" Well , well , I have that note ; and can shew it after dinner to convince Mr .
She had been satisfied to hear and believe just what Mrs . Goddard chose to tell her ; and looked no farther .
It was a great consolation that Mr . Elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him -- that Harriet ' s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body ' s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father ' s being given a moment ' s uneasiness about it .
With mixed feelings , she seated herself at a little distance from the numbers round the instrument , to listen .
" Yes , very true ," cried Frank , " very true .
Emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ; and after a moment ' s debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , replied ,
As to her illness , all nothing of course .
I am a great advocate for timidity -- and I am sure one does not often meet with it .-- But in those who are at all inferior , it is extremely prepossessing .
Such events are very interesting , but the suspense of them cannot last long .
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council ; and her father , engaging to think it all over while she was gone , the two young people set off together without delay for the Crown .
I assure you I am not at all pleased .
Not that I think Mr . Martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education -- and been very well brought up .
His tall , firm , upright figure , among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly men , was such as Emma felt must draw every body ' s eyes ; and , excepting her own partner , there was not one among the whole row of young men who could be compared with him .-- He moved a few steps nearer , and those few steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner , with what natural grace , he must have danced , would he but take the trouble .-- Whenever she caught his eye , she forced him to smile ; but in general he was looking grave .
Where I have a regard , I always think a person well - looking .
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it .
One perplexity , however , arose , which the gentlemen did not disdain .
As he became rational , he ought to have roused himself and shaken off all that was unworthy in their authority .
poor woman , who would have thought it !"
I have been seeing their intimacy with the greatest pleasure .
" Which makes his good manners the more valuable .
It was all general approbation and smoothness ; nothing delineated or distinguished .
asked Isabella in the plaintive tone which just suited her father .
To understand , thoroughly understand her own heart , was the first endeavour .
Now I say , my dear , in _our_ case , for _lady_ , read ---- mum !
I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away -- and when I have gone through my particular friends , then I begin dreaming of Mr . and Mrs .
" No , indeed , I shall grant you nothing .
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him ; and that if he does chuse me , it will not be any thing so very wonderful ."
I am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs . Cole told us of it at dinner ."
" Increase !"
" He has been here this very morning , on a most extraordinary errand .
He must do it all himself .
" I am sure William Larkins will not like it .
It would be a great comfort to Mr . Weston , as he grew older -- and even Mr . Weston might be growing older ten years hence -- to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense , the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home ; and Mrs . Weston -- no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her ; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach , should not have their powers in exercise again .
" So prettily done !
Our coachman and horses are so extremely expeditious !-- I believe we drive faster than any body .-- What a pleasure it is to send one ' s carriage for a friend !-- I understand you were so kind as to offer , but another time it will be quite unnecessary .
" Oh !
" Excuse me , ma ' am , but this is by no means my intention ; I make no inquiry myself , and should be sorry to have any made by my friends .
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
Such might be his constitution ; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often the cure of such incidental complaints , she recommended his taking some refreshment ; he would find abundance of every thing in the dining - room -- and she humanely pointed out the door .
Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs . Weston , and of moments only of regret ; and her satisfaction -- her more than satisfaction -- her cheerful enjoyment , was so just and so apparent , that Emma , well as she knew her father , was sometimes taken by surprize at his being still able to pity ` poor Miss Taylor ,' when they left her at Randalls in the centre of every domestic comfort , or saw her go away in the evening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own .
I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town .
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body ; and he had , therefore , earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding - cake at all , and when that proved vain , as earnestly tried to prevent any body ' s eating it .
I went for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se ' nnight ."
No , we should not have heard , if it had not been for this particular circumstance , of her being to come here so soon .
I have a great deal of vivacity in my own way , but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak and when to hold my tongue .
" Oh !
There are secrets in all families , you know )-- The case is , that a party of friends are invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January ; and that Frank ' s coming depends upon their being put off .
They will come and stand by my chair , and say , ` Grandpapa , can you give me a bit of string ?'
By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment .
My mother ' s are really very good indeed .
Charming people , Mr . and Mrs . Weston ;-- Mrs . Weston indeed is much beyond praise , and he is exactly what one values , so hospitable , and so fond of society ;-- it will be a small party , but where small parties are select , they are perhaps the most agreeable of any .
Would not Mr . Knightley shew them the gardens -- all the gardens ?-- She wished to see the whole extent ."
One has not great hopes from Birmingham .
Harriet ' s staying away so long was beginning to make her uneasy .
As they were turning into the grounds , Mr . Perry passed by on horseback .
And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive , and be a very rich man in time -- and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb _us_ ."
Oh yes , Friday or Saturday next .
Then changing from a frown to a smile --" No , do not tell me -- I do not want to know what you mean .-- Where is my father ?-- When are we to begin dancing ?"
He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith , or speaking to those who were close to her .-- Emma saw it .
I am sure , a month ago , I had no more idea myself !-- The strangest things do take place !"
Her influence would have been enough .
Though , perhaps , as the _Chaperon_ of the party -- _I_ never was in any circle -- exploring parties -- young ladies -- married women --"
I hope you have pleasant accounts from Windsor ?"
Then changing from a frown to a smile --" No , do not tell me -- I do not want to know what you mean .-- Where is my father ?-- When are we to begin dancing ?"
Come , my dear Emma , let us be friends , and say no more about it .
He was no dancer in general .
" Had you any idea ," cried Harriet , " of his being in love with her ?-- You , perhaps , might .-- You ( blushing as she spoke ) who can see into every body ' s heart ; but nobody else --"
Dear , Miss Woodhouse , I was absolutely miserable !
Emma had hardly expected them : for Mr . Weston , who had called in for half a minute , in order to hear that his son was very handsome , knew nothing of their plans ; and it was an agreeable surprize to her , therefore , to perceive them walking up to the house together , arm in arm .
As they were turning into the grounds , Mr . Perry passed by on horseback .
She doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman , in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax ' s feelings to Frank Churchill .
No such importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at present .
" There is no denying it ," he replied .
Knightley !-- I could not have believed it .
Tell your aunt , little Emma , that she ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances , and that if she were not wrong before , she is now ."
That is the reason of her writing out of rule , as we call it ; for , in the common course , we should not have heard from her before next Tuesday or Wednesday ."
She ran away to indulge the inclination , leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure to Harriet ' s share .
And , in short , from knowing his usual ways , I am very much inclined to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all .
" It is as long again as almost all we have had before ."
" Are you well , my Emma ?"
I am delighted to find myself in such a circle .
She and Mr . Frank Churchill had been at Weymouth at the same time .
Knightley .-- They had determined that their marriage ought to be concluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield , to allow them the fortnight ' s absence in a tour to the seaside , which was the plan .-- John and Isabella , and every other friend , were agreed in approving it .
no -- I never conceived you could become indifferent .
and " John , how are you ?"
Perhaps he wanted to speak to her , of his attachment to Harriet ; he might be watching for encouragement to begin .-- She did not , could not , feel equal to lead the way to any such subject .
Emma could say no more .
I wanted to know a little more , and this tells me quite enough .
CHAPTER II
Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs . and Miss Bates , Mr . Knightley , as I told you before .
