said Mr . Weston , looking about .
Do you suppose she does not often say all this to herself ?
I heard a good deal of Colonel Campbell ' s taste at Weymouth ; and the softness of the upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would particularly prize .
I never was equal to this ."
As to her illness , all nothing of course .
Good morning to you , my dear sir .
I do not think it could disagree with you ."
Oh !
Do not you see that , at this instant , the very passage of her own letter , which sent me the report , is passing under her eye -- that the whole blunder is spread before her -- that she can attend to nothing else , though pretending to listen to the others ?"
Leave it all to me .
When she looked at the hedges , she thought the elder at least must soon be coming out ; and when she turned round to Harriet , she saw something like a look of spring , a tender smile even there .
No , he could not believe it a bad house ; not such a house as a man was to be pitied for having .
and to see you in such excellent looks !-- I would not have missed this meeting for the world .
I think you will agree with me , ( turning with a soft air to Emma ,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation , though Mr . Knightley perhaps , from being used to the large parties of London , may not quite enter into our feelings ."
" Poor child !"
I have a great regard for Mr . Perry .
He felt the going away almost too much to speak of it .
I remembered what I used to do myself .
.
She cast her eye over it , pondered , caught the meaning , read it through again to be quite certain , and quite mistress of the lines , and then passing it to Harriet , sat happily smiling , and saying to herself , while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness , " Very well , Mr . Elton , very well indeed .
Mr . Elton looked all happiness at this proposition ; and nothing could exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage .
" Indeed !
In the meanwhile , she resolved against seeing Harriet .-- It would do neither of them good , it would do the subject no good , to be talking of it farther .-- She was resolved not to be convinced , as long as she could doubt , and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet ' s confidence .
The next question was --
" Have you heard from her yourself this morning ?"
No coffee , I thank you , for me -- never take coffee .-- A little tea if you please , sir , by and bye ,-- no hurry -- Oh !
Oh !
Miss Taylor has been used to have two persons to please ; she will now have but one .
Surprizes are foolish things .
Mr . Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas -- though you know it is longer since they were with him , than with us ."
" No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
Invite him to dinner , Emma , and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave him to chuse his own wife .
But I was really quite shocked the other day -- for Mr . Knightley called one morning , and Jane was eating these apples , and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyed them , and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock .
I had no right to expect much , and I did not expect much ; but I had no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air .
" I mentioned no _names_ , you will observe .-- Oh !
It was a pity , perhaps , that he had not come last night ; for , though the child seemed well now , very well considering , it would probably have been better if Perry had seen it ."
if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax !"
After the first chat of pleasure he was silent ; and then , in a graver tone , began with ,
The dews of a summer evening are what I would not expose any body to .
You must promise me not to sit up ."
The boy had , with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his mother ' s , been the means of a sort of reconciliation ; and Mr . and Mrs . Churchill , having no children of their own , nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for , offered to take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease .
" Frank was here in February for a fortnight ."
I cannot at all consent to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying ; and I am sure it is not at all likely .
She had taken up the idea , she supposed , and made every thing bend to it .
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
Is not it so ?"
I can easily believe that letters are very little to you , much less than to me , but it is not your being ten years older than myself which makes the difference , it is not age , but situation .
Her tears fell abundantly -- but her grief was so truly artless , that no dignity could have made it more respectable in Emma ' s eyes -- and she listened to her and tried to console her with all her heart and understanding -- really for the time convinced that Harriet was the superior creature of the two -- and that to resemble her would be more for her own welfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence could do .
He has not such a fine air and way of walking as Mr . Knightley .
Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday , and spoke of it as for Saturday ."
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
We must do whatever is to be done quickest , and I think our feelings will lose no time there .
As she thought less of his inebriety , she thought more of his inconstancy and presumption ; and with fewer struggles for politeness , replied ,
Compliments , charades , and horrible blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved very well , and was only rather pale and silent .
It was a right thing to do .
And he is a very clever boy , indeed .
" Proof indeed !"
" What a very great pleasure it will be to you !
It is the greatest absurdity -- Actually snowing at this moment !-- The folly of not allowing people to be comfortable at home -- and the folly of people ' s not staying comfortably at home when they can !
Martin !"
You , who have been hearing and seeing so much of late on these subjects , who must have been so deep in the business on Miss Campbell ' s account -- we shall not excuse your being indifferent about Mr . Elton and Miss Hawkins ."
But she was not wanted to speak .
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy , and very communicative ; Jane would hardly eat any thing :-- Mr . Perry recommended nourishing food ; but every thing they could command ( and never had any body such good neighbours ) was distasteful .
All looked up to them .
And as for Harriet , I will venture to say that _she_ cannot gain by the acquaintance .
He joined them immediately , and , with scarcely an invitation , seated himself between them .
" I hope you did not venture far , Miss Fairfax , this morning , or I am sure you must have been wet .-- We scarcely got home in time .
Harriet Smith ' s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing .
" I never saw any gentleman ' s handwriting "-- Emma began , looking also at Mrs . Weston ; but stopped , on perceiving that Mrs . Weston was attending to some one else -- and the pause gave her time to reflect , " Now , how am I going to introduce him ?-- Am I unequal to speaking his name at once before all these people ?
And how beautiful we thought he looked !
How she could have been so deceived !-- He protested that he had never thought seriously of Harriet -- never !
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait .
said he to Emma , and trying , as he spoke , to catch Miss Fairfax ' s eye .
It seemed the best scheme ; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better .
She smiled her acceptance ; and nothing less than a summons from Richmond was to take him back before the following evening .
" I shall hear about you all ," said he ; " that is my chief consolation .
I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'
" I am going to Kingston .
I shall write to Mrs . Partridge in a day or two , and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look - out for any thing eligible ."
It makes me envious and miserable ;-- I who have never seen it !
You know we have settled all that already .
If Mr . and Mrs . Weston will be so obliging as to call here one morning , we may talk it over , and see what can be done ."
Henceforward I know nothing of the matter .
They hardly can satisfy a woman of her good sense and quick feelings : standing in a mother ' s place , but without a mother ' s affection to blind her .
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten days ' end , her nephew ' s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan .
_She_ was not present when the suspicion first arose .
-- She thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully ; and the first possible cause for it , suggested by her fears , was , that he had perhaps been communicating his plans to his brother , and was pained by the manner in which they had been received .
Her influence would have been enough .
" It is hotter to - day ."
" I am sorry to find , my love , that my father does not think you looking well -- but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued .
But what is distance , Mr . Weston , to people of large fortune ?-- You would be amazed to hear how my brother , Mr . Suckling , sometimes flies about .
I always fetch the letters when I am here .
She then took a longer time for consideration .
-- Ford ' s was the principal woollen - draper , linen - draper , and haberdasher ' s shop united ; the shop first in size and fashion in the place .--" And so , there she had set , without an idea of any thing in the world , full ten minutes , perhaps -- when , all of a sudden , who should come in -- to be sure it was so very odd !-- but they always dealt at Ford ' s -- who should come in , but Elizabeth Martin and her brother !-- Dear Miss Woodhouse !
( turning to Emma .)
Why should he marry ?-- He is as happy as possible by himself ; with his farm , and his sheep , and his library , and all the parish to manage ; and he is extremely fond of his brother ' s children .
I should be as ready to acknowledge his merits as any other man ; but I hear of none , except what are merely personal ; that he is well - grown and good - looking , with smooth , plausible manners ."
A very friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax , she hoped , might lead the way to a return of old feelings .
no ," said he ; " it would be the extreme of imprudence .
This would be a trial .
