Miss Bates stood in the very worst predicament in the world for having much of the public favour ; and she had no intellectual superiority to make atonement to herself , or frighten those who might hate her into outward respect .
Early , I know , you had none ."
Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour , and they had only accomplished some views of St . Mark ' s Place , Venice , when Frank Churchill entered the room .
He thought she had undertaken more than she was equal to , and that she felt it so herself , though she would not own it .
They met Mr . Martin the very next day , as they were walking on the Donwell road .
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much -- but she did not know -- and so , she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do .--" Emma was half - ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful .
[ To Mrs .
" These matters are always a secret , till it is found out that every body knows them .
They walked together .
She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning .
" You will make my excuses , my dear , as civilly as possible .
He paused -- and growing cooler in a moment , added , with only sarcastic dryness , " If Mr . Perry can tell me how to convey a wife and five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with no greater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty , I should be as willing to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself ."
" No ," said Emma , laughing ; " but perhaps there might be some made to his coming back again .
" As soon as my aunt gets well , I shall go abroad ," said he .
Harriet would be anxiety enough ; she need no longer be unhappy about Jane , whose troubles and whose ill - health having , of course , the same origin , must be equally under cure .-- Her days of insignificance and evil were over .-- She would soon be well , and happy , and prosperous .-- Emma could now imagine why her own attentions had been slighted .
" Harriet !"
Her next beginning was ,
" I cannot rate her beauty as you do ," said he ; " but she is a pretty little creature , and I am inclined to think very well of her disposition .
The idea of Mr . Elton was certainly cheering ; but still , after a time , she was tender - hearted again towards the rejected Mr . Martin .
Weston ?-- To Bath , or to Clifton ?"
" He ought to come ," said Emma .
.
Weston , tell me at once .-- Something has happened in Brunswick Square .
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
" My dear Emma , as long as he thinks so , it is so ; but if he really loves Jane Fairfax --"
yes , quite indispensable ."
It is a very cold afternoon -- but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter .-- Ha !
It was no longer in Emma ' s power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures .
So very obliging of Mr . Frank Churchill !
" Jane caught a bad cold , poor thing !
I have no faith in Mrs . Elton ' s acknowledging herself the inferior in thought , word , or deed ; or in her being under any restraint beyond her own scanty rule of good - breeding .
Mr . Knightley , however , shewed no triumphant happiness .
And it is no small credit , in my opinion , to him , that he should excite such an affection ; for , though I would not say it to any body else , she has no more heart than a stone to people in general ; and the devil of a temper ."
you amuse me excessively .
" And I assure you , Mr . Weston , I have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour .
" Perhaps it is as well ," said Frank Churchill , as he attended Emma to her carriage .
She was soon convinced that it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed ; it was for him .
go to - day , go to - day .
As to the pretence of trying her native air , I look upon that as a mere excuse .-- In the summer it might have passed ; but what can any body ' s native air do for them in the months of January , February , and March ?
You pass it over very handsomely -- but you were perfectly right ."
I am quite ready .
To look at her , nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to have secured such a situation .
-- And from her great , her more than commonly thankful delight towards Mrs . Elton for being there , Emma guessed that there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane , from the vicarage quarter , which was now graciously overcome .-- After a few whispers , indeed , which placed it beyond a guess , Mrs . Elton , speaking louder , said ,
I hope , with all my heart , the young man may be a Weston in merit , and a Churchill in fortune .-- But Harriet Smith -- I have not half done about Harriet Smith .
Mr . Elton , in very good spirits , was one of the first to walk in .
Escape , however , was not his plan .
and it will not be very long , I hope , before that becomes the acknowledgment of more than your reason .-- Fortunate that your affections were not farther entangled !-- I could never , I confess , from your manners , assure myself as to the degree of what you felt -- I could only be certain that there was a preference -- and a preference which I never believed him to deserve .-- He is a disgrace to the name of man .-- And is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman ?-- Jane , Jane , you will be a miserable creature ."
Is not it so ?"
Every body seemed happy ; and the praise of being a delightful ball , which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be , was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this .
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
CHAPTER XVII
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration .
She might have prevented the indulgence and increase of such sentiments .
Knightley ?"
_Perfection_ should not have come quite so soon ."
They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
Of all the sources of evil surrounding the former , since her coming to Highbury , she was persuaded that she must herself have been the worst .
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr . Elton ' s having dropt a hint .
He appeared to have a very open temper -- certainly a very cheerful and lively one ; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions , a great deal decidedly right ; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard , was fond of talking of him -- said he would be the best man in the world if he were left to himself ; and though there was no being attached to the aunt , he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude , and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect .
He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend -- her fair , lovely , amiable friend .
The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness , and all the selfishness of imaginary complaints .
dear , yes ," before the gentleman joined them .
They were all three walking about together for an hour or two -- first round the shrubberies of Hartfield , and afterwards in Highbury .
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
I made her take her shawl -- for the evenings are not warm -- her large new shawl -- Mrs . Dixon ' s wedding - present .-- So kind of her to think of my mother !
One cannot wonder , one cannot wonder .
" He will have every body ' s wishes for his happiness ."
Going in dismal weather , to return probably in worse ;-- four horses and four servants taken out for nothing but to convey five idle , shivering creatures into colder rooms and worse company than they might have had at home ."
There was no bearing such an " always ;" and to break through her dreadful gratitude , Emma made the direct inquiry of --
Emma was delighted , and only wanted him to go on in the same style ; but his mind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane , and his next words were ,
He would soon be among them again ; Mr . Elton and his bride .
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
Emma was extremely gratified .-- They were interrupted by the bustle of Mr . Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again .
I admire all that quaint , old - fashioned politeness ; it is much more to my taste than modern ease ; modern ease often disgusts me .
The evening of this day was very long , and melancholy , at Hartfield .
She was afterwards looking for her shawl -- Frank Churchill was looking also -- it was growing dusk , and the room was in confusion ; and how they parted , Mr . Knightley could not tell .
Mine , I confess , are exhausted .
But in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
And here I can admit , that my manners to Miss W ., in being unpleasant to Miss F ., were highly blameable .
He paused .
A thousand vexatious thoughts would recur .
She was ready to tell every thing in her power , but on this subject questions were vain .
" If he would be so good as to read to them , it would be a kindness indeed !
He was here only a quarter of an hour , and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay -- but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said .
The happiness of this most happy day , received its completion , in the animated contemplation of his worth which this comparison produced .
" No ,"-- he calmly replied ,--" there is but one married woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite what guests she pleases to Donwell , and that one is --"
You are quite mistaken .
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
" Yes ."
Oh !
They added to their house , to their number of servants , to their expenses of every sort ; and by this time were , in fortune and style of living , second only to the family at Hartfield .
Weston ."
She could not endure to give him the true explanation ; for though her suspicions were by no means removed , she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them .
Why does he make it any business of his , to wonder at what I do ?-- at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another ?-- I may be allowed , I hope , the use of my judgment as well as Mr .
However , I think it answered so far as to tempt one to go again .
Donwell was famous for its strawberry - beds , which seemed a plea for the invitation : but no plea was necessary ; cabbage - beds would have been enough to tempt the lady , who only wanted to be going somewhere .
Mr . Weston might be his son ' s superior .-- In spite of this little rub , however , Emma was smiling with enjoyment , delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was forming , and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity before her .-- She was more disturbed by Mr . Knightley ' s not dancing than by any thing else .-- There he was , among the standers - by , where he ought not to be ; he ought to be dancing ,-- not classing himself with the husbands , and fathers , and whist - players , who were pretending to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up ,-- so young as he looked !-- He could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps anywhere , than where he had placed himself .
This discovery laid many smaller matters open .
I used to think she was not capable of being fond of any body , except herself : but she has always been kind to him ( in her way -- allowing for little whims and caprices , and expecting every thing to be as she likes ).
I shall have no difficulty , I suppose , in finding the house ; though Fairfax , I believe , is not the proper name -- I should rather say Barnes , or Bates .
