Mr . Elton and I are very good friends , and nothing more ;" and she walked on , amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances , of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into ; and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant , and in want of counsel .
That was your name for him , was it ?"
They had sung together once or twice , it appeared , at Weymouth .
This , Harriet , is an alliance which can never raise a blush in either of us ."
Decidedly , I think , a very gentleman - like man ."
" Yes -- a good deal _nearer_ ."
" Oh !
I was sitting near the door -- Elizabeth saw me directly ; but he did not ; he was busy with the umbrella .
" If he would be so good as to read to them , it would be a kindness indeed !
Thy ready wit the word will soon supply .
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
I must get on to Kingston as fast as I can ."
" I cannot agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot .
With all the eagerness which such a transition gives , Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon as possible .
My regard for Hartfield is most warm "--
You never wrote a truer line ."
Now I cannot say , that I think you are any of you looking well at present ."
The weather does not look well , and grandmama will be uneasy .
Jane Fairfax was very elegant , remarkably elegant ; and she had herself the highest value for elegance .
No , you shall send it to Hartfield , if you please .
He left me not half an hour ago ."
Either in the morning or evening of every day , excepting one , have we seen either Mr . Weston or Mrs . Weston , and generally both , either at Randalls or here -- and as you may suppose , Isabella , most frequently here .
Oh !
cried Mr . Weston , " about Perry and a carriage ?
What is before me , I see .
Emma was most sincerely interested .
The result of his reverie was , " No , Emma , I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me by surprize .-- I never had a thought of her in that way , I assure you ."
It will do you good to speak of your distress , whatever it may be ."
It would be a great comfort to Mr . Weston , as he grew older -- and even Mr . Weston might be growing older ten years hence -- to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense , the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home ; and Mrs . Weston -- no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her ; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach , should not have their powers in exercise again .
He is going to Kingston .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
There is jealousy .
There was no denying that those brothers had penetration .
" And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you ?"
Anywhere , so that Jane is not in a draught .
So would poor little Harriet .
There is safety in reserve , but no attraction .
I was introducing her into good company , and giving her the opportunity of pleasing some one worth having ; I ought not to have attempted more .
` But ,' said I , ` to be quite honest , I do not think I can live without something of a musical society .
In short , she sat , during the first visit , looking at Jane Fairfax with twofold complacency ; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice , and was determining that she would dislike her no longer .
Well , now I have just given you a hint of what Jane writes about , we will turn to her letter , and I am sure she tells her own story a great deal better than I can tell it for her ."
Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expression of her face ; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs . Bates , and appearing to attend to the good old lady ' s replies , she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss Fairfax , and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side , saying , with significant nods ,
" No , I am sure it is not from the Campbells .
" You may depend upon me ," said she .
" I saw her answer !-- nothing could be clearer ."
He stopped in his earnestness to look the question , and the expression of his eyes overpowered her .
I remember her telling me at the ball , that I owed Mrs . Elton gratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax .-- I hope this history of my conduct towards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what you saw amiss .
I am sure of your kind support and aid ."
No , she had had enough of interference .
Warmth and tenderness of heart , with an affectionate , open manner , will beat all the clearness of head in the world , for attraction , I am sure it will .
He walked off in more complete self - approbation than he left for her .
" Oh !
All the better .
" Here comes this dear old beau of mine , I protest !-- Only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men !-- what a dear creature he is ;-- I assure you I like him excessively .
And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour .
I smile because you smile , and shall probably suspect whatever I find you suspect ; but at present I do not see what there is to question .
By that time , it was beginning to hold up , and I was determined that nothing should stop me from getting away -- and then -- only think !-- I found he was coming up towards me too -- slowly you know , and as if he did not quite know what to do ; and so he came and spoke , and I answered -- and I stood for a minute , feeling dreadfully , you know , one can ' t tell how ; and then I took courage , and said it did not rain , and I must go ; and so off I set ; and I had not got three yards from the door , when he came after me , only to say , if I was going to Hartfield , he thought I had much better go round by Mr . Cole ' s stables , for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain .
" No , it by no means wanted strength -- it was not a large hand , but very clear and certainly strong .
evil to some is always good to others .
" Oh !
They are some of my very old friends .
then , don ' t speak it , don ' t speak it ," she eagerly cried .
See the consequence of keeping you company !-- What do you say to it ?"
evil to some is always good to others .
It was not the gipsies -- it was not Mr . Frank Churchill that I meant .
Before she had committed herself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax , or done more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors , than saying to Mr . Knightley , " She certainly is handsome ; she is better than handsome !"
" My dear sir , upon no account in the world ; my father can direct me ."
Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can : at any rate do not let them carry you far , unless you are persuaded of his liking you .
good I am sure .-- I see it in your countenance .
" What is the matter ?"
While he stood , as if meaning to go , but not going -- her father began his inquiries .
The conviction seemed real ; he looked as if he felt it .
I want you to call me something else , but I do not know what ."
A mind like hers , once opening to suspicion , made rapid progress .
He never wished to attach me .
True affection only could have prompted it ."
" And I do envy him , Emma .
This had just taken place and with great cordiality , when John Knightley made his appearance , and " How d ' ye do , George ?"
They want her ( Mr . and Mrs . Dixon ) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs . Campbell ; quite depend upon it ; nothing can be more kind or pressing than their _joint_ invitation , Jane says , as you will hear presently ; Mr . Dixon does not seem in the least backward in any attention .
I am sure Miss Fairfax must have found the evening pleasant , Emma .
Selina says it is quite horror to her -- and I believe I have caught a little of her nicety .
" There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart ," said she afterwards to herself .
They will stay a good while when they do come , and he will be half his time with us .
but why so ?-- I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleases or amuses you , should not please and amuse me too ."
It was very wrong of me , you know , to keep any remembrances , after he was married .
But poor Mrs . Bates had a bad cold about a month ago ."
To take her -- be it only an hour or two -- from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ; and the following morning she wrote again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name -- mentioning that she had Mr . Perry ' s decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for his patient .
Jane she had a distinct glimpse of , looking extremely ill ; and , before the door had shut them out , she heard Miss Bates saying , " Well , my dear , I shall _say_ you are laid down upon the bed , and I am sure you are ill enough ."
Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waited for dinner , he was talking to Miss Fairfax .
You are so kind !"
It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the country .-- The Box Hill party had decided him on going away .
I did not know that I had fixed a day , but as he says I did , I am going now ."
Knightley !-- never seen him in her life before , and call him Knightley !-- and discover that he is a gentleman !
Many vain solicitudes would be prevented -- many awkwardnesses smoothed by it .
CHAPTER XVIII
He listened with all due deference ; acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same -- but yet he must confess , that to him nothing could make amends for the want of the fine glow of health .
Elton ."
I am very little able -- Have you a chair , ma ' am ?
She listened , and found it well worth listening to .
She brought no name , no blood , no alliance .
