And Mr . Weston at the same time , walking briskly with long steps through the passage , was calling out ,
It was very natural for you to say , what right has he to lecture me ?-- and I am afraid very natural for you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner .
What would you advise me to do ?
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault .
Perhaps it is paid already .
Mrs . Weston had been delighted before , and was delighted again ; Emma joined her in all her praise ; and the pianoforte , with every proper discrimination , was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise .
That she was really ill was very certain ; he had declared himself convinced of it , at Randalls .
She had sent while dressing , and the answer had been , " Much the same -- not better ."
Part only of this answer , however , was admitted .
With the greatest respect , and the warmest friendship , do I mention Miss Woodhouse ; my father perhaps will think I ought to add , with the deepest humiliation .-- A few words which dropped from him yesterday spoke his opinion , and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to .-- My behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated , I believe , more than it ought .-- In order to assist a concealment so essential to me , I was led on to make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediately thrown .-- I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my ostensible object -- but I am sure you will believe the declaration , that had I not been convinced of her indifference , I would not have been induced by any selfish views to go on .-- Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is , she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached ; and that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me , was as much my conviction as my wish .-- She received my attentions with an easy , friendly , goodhumoured playfulness , which exactly suited me .
She hardly knew what to say .
she cried in evident embarrassment , " it all meant nothing ; a mere joke among ourselves ."
" Donwell !"
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
Harriet had no penetration .
Mr . Weston , however , too eager to be very observant , too communicative to want others to talk , was very well satisfied with what she did say , and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of what the whole room must have overheard already .
I honour that part of the attention particularly ; it shews it to have been so thoroughly from the heart .
" To fall in with each other on such an errand as this ," thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side .
But Mr . Weston is almost an old man .
" If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women , and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them , as you are where these children are concerned , we might always think alike ."
She wanted , rather , to be quiet , and out of temptation ; but still , as it was desirable that she should appear , in general , like her usual self , she took care to express as much interest in the circumstance , and enter as warmly into Mr . and Mrs . Weston ' s disappointment , as might naturally belong to their friendship .
He was arm - in - arm with Mr .
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to - day ."
You might not give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise ; but you were receiving a very good education from _her_ , on the very material matrimonial point of submitting your own will , and doing as you were bid ; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife , I should certainly have named Miss Taylor ."
" Very like Maple Grove indeed !-- She was quite struck by the likeness !-- That room was the very shape and size of the morning - room at Maple Grove ; her sister ' s favourite room ."
Such an end of the doleful disappointment of five weeks back !
Elton ?"
And , in fact , you have heard all the essential already .
At last Jane began , and though the first bars were feebly given , the powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to .
" Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before ."
" I have not been working uninterruptedly ," he replied , " I have been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument stand steadily , it was not quite firm ; an unevenness in the floor , I believe .
However , she seems a very obliging , pretty - behaved young lady , and no doubt will make him a very good wife .
Mrs . John Knightley was a pretty , elegant little woman , of gentle , quiet manners , and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate ; wrapt up in her family ; a devoted wife , a doating mother , and so tenderly attached to her father and sister that , but for these higher ties , a warmer love might have seemed impossible .
` My dear ,' said I , ` I shall say you are laid down upon the bed :' but , however , she is not ; she is walking about the room .
Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure ; and fully assented to his proposition of Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their party quite complete .
However , I think it answered so far as to tempt one to go again .
I could almost assert that you had _named_ Mr . Frank Churchill .
I know what worthy people they are .
I should be surprized if , after seeing them , you could be in company with Mr . Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before .
Short of that , it is all guess and luck -- and will generally be ill - luck .
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
He is so very superior .
He caught her ."
" It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy , but I cannot believe it .
Mr . Churchill was better than could be expected ; and their first removal , on the departure of the funeral for Yorkshire , was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor , to whom Mr . Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years .
Do try to find it out , Miss Woodhouse .
" I hope he does ," replied Mr . Knightley coolly , and resuming the letter .
I can much more readily enter into the temptation of getting away from Miss Bates , than I can believe in the triumph of Miss Fairfax ' s mind over Mrs . Elton .
She thought it was time to make up .
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in her mind which Harriet had occupied .
I cannot really change for the better .
Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles .
In short , I have made a match between Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax .
My dear sir , you are too obliging .
There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner .
" She loves him then excessively , I suppose .
" I mean that he has done it ," answered Mr . Knightley , with smiling but determined decision , " and been accepted ."
" Mrs . Bates , let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs .
" Business , you know , may bring money , but friendship hardly ever does ."
He had , in fact , been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence .
And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twice over before the good old lady could comprehend it .
" So much the better -- or so much the worse :-- I do not know which .
Knightley .'
I have been walking all this way in complete suspense .
After much thinking , she could determine on nothing better , than Harriet ' s returning the visit ; but in a way that , if they had understanding , should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance .
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End .
In short , I have made a match between Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax .
And ( raising his voice still more ) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too .
There is to be no form or parade -- a sort of gipsy party .
Shall I call upon them ?
She was his object , and every body must perceive it .
CHAPTER IV
I am sorry Mr . and Mrs . Cole should have done it .
No one , I believe , can blame her more than she is disposed to blame herself .
.
I made the match , you know , four years ago ; and to have it take place , and be proved in the right , when so many people said Mr . Weston would never marry again , may comfort me for any thing ."
" Oh !
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield .
The evening was quiet and conversable , as Mr . Woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella , and the little party made two natural divisions ; on one side he and his daughter ; on the other the two Mr . Knightleys ; their subjects totally distinct , or very rarely mixing -- and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other .
I can hardly imagine the young man whom I saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well , if left quite to his own powers , and yet it is not the style of a woman ; no , certainly , it is too strong and concise ; not diffuse enough for a woman .
Had she left her where she ought , and where he had told her she ought !-- Had she not , with a folly which no tongue could express , prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong -- all would have been safe ; none of this dreadful sequel would have been .
I think they judge wisely .
The interest he takes in her -- his anxiety about her health -- his concern that she should have no happier prospect !
How well she looked last night !"
I hope you find a chair .
Peculiarly lucky !-- for as to any real knowledge of a person ' s disposition that Bath , or any public place , can give -- it is all nothing ; there can be no knowledge .
" You are ungrateful ."
But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her ; and she goes so seldom from home ."
I doubt it .
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style -- Candles everywhere .-- I was telling you of your grandmama , Jane ,-- There was a little disappointment .-- The baked apples and biscuits , excellent in their way , you know ; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first , and good Mr . Woodhouse , not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough , sent it all out again .
These were charming feelings -- but not lasting .
" Thank you .
His company so sought after , that every body says he need not eat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it ; that he has more invitations than there are days in the week .
Her character depends upon those she is with ; but in good hands she will turn out a valuable woman ."
" Oh !
I had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
Let me hear from you without delay ; I am impatient for a thousand particulars .
She gained on them , however , involuntarily : the child ' s pace was quick , and theirs rather slow ; and she was the more concerned at it , from their being evidently in a conversation which interested them .
Mr . Perry is not gone ."
And touching Miss Bates , who at that moment passed near --" Miss Bates , are you mad , to let your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner ?
