Ford .-- " Yes -- no -- yes , to Mrs . Goddard ' s .
As she sat one morning , looking forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note was brought from Mrs . Goddard , requesting , in most respectful terms , to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her ; a most welcome request : for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen , whom Emma knew very well by sight , and had long felt an interest in , on account of her beauty .
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor ' s merits , without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse ' s character , than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor ' s .
While he was so dull , it was no wonder that Harriet should be dull likewise ; and they were both insufferable .
Her objections to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying did not in the least subside .
turning away distressed .
In no other light could you have been more to me than a common acquaintance .
It would be a great comfort to Mr . Weston , as he grew older -- and even Mr . Weston might be growing older ten years hence -- to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense , the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home ; and Mrs . Weston -- no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her ; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach , should not have their powers in exercise again .
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience , his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him .
My first doth affliction denote , Which my second is destin ' d to feel And my whole is the best antidote That affliction to soften and heal .--
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
-- " He was generally thought so ."
I would have her understand me .
Where is it ?
And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield , so convenient for even solitary female walking , and in Mr . Weston ' s disposition and circumstances , which would make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in the week together .
Two such could never be granted .
Emma was most sincerely interested .
Her visit to Abbey - Mill , this summer , seems to have done his business .
Her father was growing nervous , and could not understand _her_ .
To take her -- be it only an hour or two -- from her aunt , to give her change of air and scene , and quiet rational conversation , even for an hour or two , might do her good ; and the following morning she wrote again to say , in the most feeling language she could command , that she would call for her in the carriage at any hour that Jane would name -- mentioning that she had Mr . Perry ' s decided opinion , in favour of such exercise for his patient .
You know , my dear , she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor was to us .
It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious , which she did not wish .
CHAPTER XVII
A real injury to the children -- a most mortifying change , and material loss to them all ;-- a very great deduction from her father ' s daily comfort -- and , as to herself , she could not at all endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey .
" I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years ' experience , and by not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child .
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again ; and after a few minutes silence , he said ,
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
Mrs . Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , & c ., set out in the little room ; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma .
Her father ' s comfort was amply secured , Mrs . Bates as well as Mrs . Goddard being able to come ; and her last pleasing duty , before she left the house , was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after dinner ; and while her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her dress , to make the two ladies all the amends in her power , by helping them to large slices of cake and full glasses of wine , for whatever unwilling self - denial his care of their constitution might have obliged them to practise during the meal .-- She had provided a plentiful dinner for them ; she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it .
" Ah !
In all probability she was at this very time waited for there ; and Mr . Knightley might be preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr . Elton , if not towards William Larkins .
-- But , said I , I shall be more sure of succeeding if one of you will go with me .--` Oh ,' said he , ` wait half a minute , till I have finished my job ;'-- For , would you believe it , Miss Woodhouse , there he is , in the most obliging manner in the world , fastening in the rivet of my mother ' s spectacles .-- The rivet came out , you know , this morning .-- So very obliging !-- For my mother had no use of her spectacles -- could not put them on .
Knightley .--" Robert Martin ' s manners have sense , sincerity , and good - humour to recommend them ; and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith could understand ."
" But if I do , I shall be crosser still .
" Yes ," said Harriet earnestly , " and well she might , nobody could ever have a better .
" Very true ," said Harriet .
The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of Harriet ' s welfare , she was really in danger of becoming too happy for security .-- What had she to wish for ?
After tea , Mr . and Mrs . Weston , and Mr . Elton sat down with Mr . Woodhouse to cards .
You are so much used to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ; and , perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex , after being used to it all her life .
She frequently gave me hints of it .
Many circumstances assisted the temptation .
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid , was paid to her .
" To be sure .
" It is a sort of thing ," cried Mrs . Elton emphatically , " which _I_ should not have thought myself privileged to inquire into .
" I must spend some time with them ; I am sure they will want it ;-- afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself .
Mr . Woodhouse would have been miserable had his daughter attempted it , and she was therefore safe from either exciting or receiving unpleasant and most unsuitable ideas .
You must have heard every thing to be sure .
He could sing a little himself .
" Oh !
Mr . Weston would take no denial ; they must all dine at Randalls one day ;-- even Mr . Woodhouse was persuaded to think it a possible thing in preference to a division of the party .
the amiable , obliging , gentle Mr .
" Yes ."
An airing in the Hartfield carriage would have been the rack , and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have been poison .
And , besides , I must give you a hint , Frank ; any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided .
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits , but principally of those of the elder , whose temper was by much the most communicative , and who was always the greater talker .
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech , the many bitter feelings , made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma ' s side , to enable her to say on reply ,
It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet ' s behalf , though it might be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom ; for evil in that quarter was at hand .
said she , with a conscious look .
He was not calm ; his spirits were evidently fluttered ; there was restlessness about him .
One man ' s style must not be the rule of another ' s .
Mrs . Goddard was the mistress of a School -- not of a seminary , or an establishment , or any thing which professed , in long sentences of refined nonsense , to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality , upon new principles and new systems -- and where young ladies for enormous pay might be screwed out of health and into vanity -- but a real , honest , old - fashioned Boarding - school , where a reasonable quantity of accomplishments were sold at a reasonable price , and where girls might be sent to be out of the way , and scramble themselves into a little education , without any danger of coming back prodigies .
" He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed -- he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield , he must hurry off ."
I have often known it done myself ."
I dare say Mr . Knightley will be so kind as to meet him ."
CHAPTER XIV
" There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends , the Eltons ," was his next observation .--" His feelings are natural .-- What !
Yes , Friday or Saturday ; she cannot say which , because Colonel Campbell will be wanting the carriage himself one of those days .
Elton .-- She looked round for a moment ; he had joined Mr . Knightley at a little distance , and was arranging himself for settled conversation , while smiles of high glee passed between him and his wife .
poor fellow !-- sad business for him .-- She was extremely concerned ; for , though very eccentric , he had a thousand good qualities .-- How could he be so taken in ?-- Did not think him at all in love -- not in the least .-- Poor Knightley !-- There would be an end of all pleasant intercourse with him .-- How happy he had been to come and dine with them whenever they asked him !
Weston ."
" Trouble !
One cannot creep upon a journey ; one cannot help getting on faster than one has planned ; and the pleasure of coming in upon one ' s friends before the look - out begins , is worth a great deal more than any little exertion it needs ."
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing - up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through -- and very good lists they were -- very well chosen , and very neatly arranged -- sometimes alphabetically , and sometimes by some other rule .
Invite them both ."
However , it was an exceeding good , pretty letter , and gave Mr . and Mrs . Weston a great deal of pleasure .
And so I am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her civilities and consents to be with her .
Forcing herself to speak , therefore , in the hope of putting it by , she calmly said ,
He wanted her to look up and smile ; and having now brought herself not to smile too broadly -- she did -- cheerfully answering ,
( with some elevation ) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance -- of Mr . Knightley ' s coming and asking me to dance , when Mr . Elton would not stand up with me ; and when there was no other partner in the room .
" Very true , Miss Woodhouse , so she will .
This card - room would be wanted as a card - room now ; or , if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves , still was it not too small for any comfortable supper ?
-- And in a louder , steadier tone , he concluded with , " He will soon be gone .
replied Miss Bates .
You and Miss Fairfax gave us some very good music .
It would have grieved me to lose your acquaintance , which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr . Martin .
Vanity working on a weak head , produces every sort of mischief .
Emma made no answer , and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned , but was really feeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone .
I know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect .-- I think we shall never materially disagree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you by a long preface .-- We are quite well .-- This letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness I have been feeling lately .-- I did not quite like your looks on Tuesday , but it was an ungenial morning ; and though you will never own being affected by weather , I think every body feels a north - east wind .-- I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning , but had the comfort of hearing last night , by Mr . Perry , that it had not made him ill . " Yours ever , " A . W ."
Yes , I understand the sort of mind .
I am sure she is very good -- I hope she will be very happy .
She stopped to breathe .
She doubted whether she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman , in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax ' s feelings to Frank Churchill .
" Mrs . John Knightley is easily alarmed , and might be made unhappy about her sister ."
She followed another carriage to Mr . Cole ' s door ; and was pleased to see that it was Mr . Knightley ' s ; for Mr . Knightley keeping no horses , having little spare money and a great deal of health , activity , and independence , was too apt , in Emma ' s opinion , to get about as he could , and not use his carriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey .
To guess what all this meant , was impossible even for Emma .
I hope we shall have her here next week .
Books of engravings , drawers of medals , cameos , corals , shells , and every other family collection within his cabinets , had been prepared for his old friend , to while away the morning ; and the kindness had perfectly answered .
