" Upon my word ," exclaimed Emma , " you amuse me !
At first , while I supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver , I saw it only as paternal kindness , and thought it the most natural thing in the world .
Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he could , with thorough self - approbation , recommend ; though he might constrain himself , while the ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer things , to say :
How delightful !"
But colds were never so prevalent as they have been this autumn .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
Where is your merit ?
" And there will be the two Gilberts , young Cox , my father , and myself , besides Mr . Knightley .
I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing .
" Indeed , Harriet , it would have been a severe pang to lose you ; but it must have been .
" Don ' t say I was cross .
" But what are you in doubt of ?
Harriet was remembered only from being _her_ friend .
there he is .
" Henry is a fine boy , but John is very like his mama .
We all know the difference between the pronouns he or she and thou , the plainest spoken amongst us ; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in our personal intercourse with each other -- a something more early implanted .
But I believe I am nice ; I do not like strange voices ; and nobody speaks like you and poor Miss Taylor .
Frank ' s was the first idea ; and his the greatest zeal in pursuing it ; for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties , and the most solicitous for accommodation and appearance .
We are so very airy !
for myself , I protest I must be excused ," said Mrs . Elton ; " _I_ really cannot attempt -- I am not at all fond of the sort of thing .
Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath ; but Bristol was her home , the very heart of Bristol ; for though the father and mother had died some years ago , an uncle remained -- in the law line -- nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded of him , than that he was in the law line ; and with him the daughter had lived .
Weston was alone in the drawing - room :-- but hardly had they been told of the baby , and Mr . Woodhouse received the thanks for coming , which he asked for , when a glimpse was caught through the blind , of two figures passing near the window .
He begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long , and which had been the home of his father ' s father ; and on recollecting that an old woman who had nursed him was still living , walked in quest of her cottage from one end of the street to the other ; and though in some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit , they shewed , altogether , a good - will towards Highbury in general , which must be very like a merit to those he was with .
Emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
But -- that he should talk of encouragement , should consider her as aware of his views , accepting his attentions , meaning ( in short ), to marry him !-- should suppose himself her equal in connexion or mind !-- look down upon her friend , so well understanding the gradations of rank below him , and be so blind to what rose above , as to fancy himself shewing no presumption in addressing her !-- It was most provoking .
The hair was curled , and the maid sent away , and Emma sat down to think and be miserable .-- It was a wretched business indeed !-- Such an overthrow of every thing she had been wishing for !-- Such a development of every thing most unwelcome !-- Such a blow for Harriet !-- that was the worst of all .
Mr . Elton certainly did not very well know what to say .
He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself ; and if Miss Woodhouse of Hartfield , the heiress of thirty thousand pounds , were not quite so easily obtained as he had fancied , he would soon try for Miss Somebody else with twenty , or with ten .
But now I seem to feel that I may deserve him ; and that if he does chuse me , it will not be any thing so very wonderful ."
They were both so truly respectable in their happiness , so disinterested in every sensation ; thought so much of Jane ; so much of every body , and so little of themselves , that every kindly feeling was at work for them .
" They walked , I conclude .
It is not every body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did , and refuse to take Jane ' s answer ; but she positively declared she would _not_ write any such denial yesterday , as Jane wished her ; she would wait -- and , sure enough , yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go .
she cried .--" And such weather for exploring !-- These delays and disappointments are quite odious .
A mind lively and at ease , can do with seeing nothing , and can see nothing that does not answer .
I cannot doubt it .
Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be going forward just at this time ?-- Do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediate commission from him , or that he may have sent only a general direction , an order indefinite as to time , to depend upon contingencies and conveniences ?"
And soon afterwards , " Jane Fairfax is a very charming young woman -- but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect .
We must bring her forward .
CHAPTER XVIII
" No , certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of the evening ."
The gruel came and supplied a great deal to be said -- much praise and many comments -- undoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution , and pretty severe Philippics upon the many houses where it was never met with tolerable ;-- but , unfortunately , among the failures which the daughter had to instance , the most recent , and therefore most prominent , was in her own cook at South End , a young woman hired for the time , who never had been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice smooth gruel , thin , but not too thin .
replied the happily deceived aunt , while eagerly hunting for the letter .--" Oh !
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company , Mr . Knightley , but I am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to Donwell Abbey ."
Every body is lazy !
It ought to be a first object , as I am sure poor Miss Taylor ' s always was with me .
Smallridge , too !
" Well , I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does , or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out .
" He had just looked into the dining - room , and as he was not wanted there , preferred being out of doors ."
Her youth had passed without distinction , and her middle of life was devoted to the care of a failing mother , and the endeavour to make a small income go as far as possible .
" He was too good !-- she could not endure the thought !-- she would not give him such a troublesome office for the world ,"-- brought on the desired repetition of entreaties and assurances ,-- and a very few minutes settled the business .
It would be a great comfort to Mr . Weston , as he grew older -- and even Mr . Weston might be growing older ten years hence -- to have his fireside enlivened by the sports and the nonsense , the freaks and the fancies of a child never banished from home ; and Mrs . Weston -- no one could doubt that a daughter would be most to her ; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how to teach , should not have their powers in exercise again .
I am sure , a month ago , I had no more idea myself !-- The strangest things do take place !"
Well , I wish them happy with all my heart .
She was vexed beyond what could have been expressed -- almost beyond what she could conceal .
" She will not be surprized , papa , at least ."
This must not be ."
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr . Frank Churchill , who is like nobody by his side .
papa , we have missed seeing them but one entire day since they married .
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
replied he .
" You are very kind , but I know what my manners were to you .-- So cold and artificial !-- I had always a part to act .-- It was a life of deceit !-- I know that I must have disgusted you ."
" I hope she does .
But though I was always doing wrong things , they were very bad wrong things , and such as did me no service .-- It would have been a much better transgression had I broken the bond of secrecy and told you every thing ."
Mr . Weston had accompanied her to Mrs . Bates ' s , and gone through his share of this essential attention most handsomely ; but she having then induced Miss Fairfax to join her in an airing , was now returned with much more to say , and much more to say with satisfaction , than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs . Bates ' s parlour , with all the encumbrance of awkward feelings , could have afforded .
" We must ask Mr . and Mrs . Weston to dine with us , while Isabella is here ."
no doubt she had been suffering a great deal : more than any body had ever supposed -- and continual pain would try the temper .
" You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs . and Miss Bates ," said Emma , " I have not heard one inquiry after them ."
I am sure I was very much surprized when I first heard she was going to be married ."
" Well -- if you please ," said Mrs . Weston rather hesitating , " if you think she will be of any use ."
" He had just looked into the dining - room , and as he was not wanted there , preferred being out of doors ."
My regard for Hartfield is most warm "--
It was , indeed , so odd ; Harriet ' s behaviour was so extremely odd , that Emma did not know how to understand it .
Mr . Dixon ' s preference of her music to her friend ' s , I can answer for being very decided ."
Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush .
she cried with more thorough gaiety , " if you fancy your brother does not do me justice , only wait till my dear father is in the secret , and hear his opinion .
Dixon !"
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
Have you thought , my dear , where you shall put her -- and what room there will be for the children ?"
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
Another view of man , my second brings ; Behold him there , the monarch of the seas !
Understanding and gratification came together .
" So early in life -- at three - and - twenty -- a period when , if a man chuses a wife , he generally chuses ill . At three - and - twenty to have drawn such a prize !
" There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory as _that_ ,"-- said Mr . Knightley , feelingly ; and for a moment or two he had done .
the good Bateses -- I am quite ashamed of myself -- but you mention them in most of your letters .
Mr . Churchill would never get over it ."
Where shall we see a better daughter , or a kinder sister , or a truer friend ?
Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion .
The advantages of Bath to the young are pretty generally understood .
On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy , and very communicative ; Jane would hardly eat any thing :-- Mr . Perry recommended nourishing food ; but every thing they could command ( and never had any body such good neighbours ) was distasteful .
It is a sort of prologue to the play , a motto to the chapter ; and will be soon followed by matter - of - fact prose ."
It is not a state to be safely entered into with doubtful feelings , with half a heart .
Mr . and Mrs . Elton , indeed , shewed no unwillingness to mix , and be as agreeable as they could ; but during the two whole hours that were spent on the hill , there seemed a principle of separation , between the other parties , too strong for any fine prospects , or any cold collation , or any cheerful Mr . Weston , to remove .
" I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say any such thing .
Sir , you are most kind .
I think Miss Fairfax dances very well ; and Mrs . Weston is the very best country - dance player , without exception , in England .
poor Harriet !"
Dear me , how clever !-- Could it really be meant for me ?"
I should not have thought it possible you could forget what passed in this very room about court - plaister , one of the very last times we ever met in it !-- It was but a very few days before I had my sore throat -- just before Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley came -- I think the very evening .-- Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your new penknife , and your recommending court - plaister ?-- But , as you had none about you , and knew I had , you desired me to supply him ; and so I took mine out and cut him a piece ; but it was a great deal too large , and he cut it smaller , and kept playing some time with what was left , before he gave it back to me .
" I thought you meant to go with me .
" Oh !
