However , she is very agreeable , and Mrs . Bates too , in a different way .
" What an excellent device ," said he , " the use of a sheepskin for carriages .
There was only Harriet , who seemed not in spirits herself , fagged , and very willing to be silent ; and Emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almost all the way home , without being at any trouble to check them , extraordinary as they were .
my dear , as Perry says , where health is at stake , nothing else should be considered ; and if one is to travel , there is not much to chuse between forty miles and an hundred .-- Better not move at all , better stay in London altogether than travel forty miles to get into a worse air .
You cannot be ignorant , Mrs . Elton , of my connexion with the family , nor of the treatment I have met with ; and , between ourselves , the whole blame of it is to be laid to her .
" Oh !
" Oh !"
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
" Oh !
He was in high spirits ; as ready to talk and laugh as ever , and seemed delighted to speak of his former visit , and recur to old stories : and he was not without agitation .
when a gallant young man , like Mr . Frank Churchill ," said Mr . Knightley dryly , " writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse , he will , of course , put forth his best ."
There was no occasion to press the matter farther .
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account , than on Harriet ' s -- more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint .
Either bathing has been of the greatest service to her , or else it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr . Wingfield ' s , which we have been applying at times ever since August ."
At the same time , nobody could wonder if Mr . Elton should have aspired -- Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on , so good - humouredly .
I will say that for you ."
" Well ," said Emma , " I suppose we shall gradually grow reconciled to the idea , and I wish them very happy .
Between _them_ it was more the intimacy of sisters .
That it was time for every body to go , concluded the subject ; and with a short final arrangement for the next day ' s scheme , they parted .
She could never see a fault in any of them .
I took him as he was sleeping on the sofa , and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see .
" No , no ," said Emma , " it will not reckon low .
When they had been all walking together , he had so often come and walked by her , and talked so very delightfully !-- He seemed to want to be acquainted with her .
Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr . Knightley .
He did really look and speak as if in a state of no common enjoyment .
No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma .
He did speak yesterday -- that is , he wrote , and was refused ."
I should have expected better judgment in Colonel Campbell ."
" Oh !
It was known that they were a little acquainted ; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as to what he truly was .
Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question .
He hesitated , got up , walked to a window .
Yes , I understand the sort of mind .
Her heart was in a glow , and she feared her face might be as hot .
Harriet had no penetration .
He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte , and turning to Emma , said ,
For some weeks past she had been spending more than half her time there , and gradually getting to have a bed - room appropriated to herself ; and Emma judged it best in every respect , safest and kindest , to keep her with them as much as possible just at present .
But whether he were entirely free from peculiar attachment -- whether there were no actual preference -- remained a little longer doubtful .
` I will not say , that since I entered into the engagement I have not had some happy moments ; but I can say , that I have never known the blessing of one tranquil hour :'-- and the quivering lip , Emma , which uttered it , was an attestation that I felt at my heart ."
" So very kind !"
Emma could not suppose any such thing , knowing as she did , that both the Mr . Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself ;-- and two basins only were ordered .
You must answer it of course -- and speedily ."
You and Mr . Elton are one as clever as the other .
" Oh !
-- He met her at the parlour - door , and hardly asking her how she did , in the natural key of his voice , sunk it immediately , to say , unheard by her father ,
She was sorry , but could not repent .
" Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ ," said Frank Churchill , with a smile at Emma , " the person has not chosen ill .
Miss Taylor , if you had not married , you would have staid at home with me ."
" Yes , to be sure , I suppose there are .
Miss Fairfax , you must not run such risks .-- Liable as you have been to severe colds , indeed you ought to be particularly careful , especially at this time of year .
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
She resolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield .
He said no more .
It was a good scheme ; but on driving to the door they heard that neither " master nor mistress was at home ;" they had both been out some time ; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield .
I am sure you did not much expect to like us .
I went for only one night , and could not get away till that very day se ' nnight ."
" Ah !
In the way of love , I am sure he does not .
" I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy ," said Mr . Knightley presently , " though I have kept my thoughts to myself ; but I now perceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet .
I am perfectly comfortable to - day ."
Emma , I must tell you what you will not ask , though I may wish it unsaid the next moment ."
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
how could it be ?-- Then I must have dreamt it -- but I was completely persuaded -- Miss Smith , you walk as if you were tired .
I will tell you exactly what I think ."
" If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man , I could have borne any thing .
Neither father nor mother could promote , and the daughter could not endure it .
" That ' s easily said , and easily felt by you , who have always been your own master .
Compliments , charades , and horrible blunders ; and it was not to be supposed that poor Harriet should not be recollecting too ; but she behaved very well , and was only rather pale and silent .
Nobody talked about it .
MY DEAR MADAM ,
I cannot at all consent to Mr . Knightley ' s marrying ; and I am sure it is not at all likely .
Mr . Churchill had made a point of it , as a token of respect to the wife he had so very recently lost ; and every body admitted it to be no more than due decorum ."
A little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear .
There are one or two , perhaps , ( glancing at Mr . Weston and Harriet ,) whose thoughts I might not be afraid of knowing ."
" And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbells ."
dear , yes ," before the gentleman joined them .
Have you finished it ?
The scene enlarged ; two persons appeared ; Mrs . Weston and her son - in - law ; they were walking into Highbury ;-- to Hartfield of course .
He is so very superior .
" It is one that I shall never change , however ."
" And I assure you , Mr . Weston , I have very little doubt that my opinion will be decidedly in his favour .
CHAPTER XVIII
While they were thus comfortably occupied , Mr . Woodhouse was enjoying a full flow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter .
" No , certainly not ; I shall go home in the cool of the evening ."
no .
Harriet was silent .
CHAPTER III
Emma then looked up , and immediately saw how it was ; and after a moment ' s debate , as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not , replied ,
He was not an ill - tempered man , not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach ; but his temper was not his great perfection ; and , indeed , with such a worshipping wife , it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be increased .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter ' s marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
" He appears rough to you ," said Emma , " because you are so very gentle yourself ; but if you could compare him with other papas , you would not think him rough .
" But they like it , papa ; there is nothing they like so much .
To Miss --
Emma was soon perfectly satisfied of Mr . Martin ' s being no otherwise remembered , than as he furnished a contrast with Mr . Elton , of the utmost advantage to the latter .
When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wandering about the meadows , at some distance from Highbury , on the afternoon of the very day on which she had , under the plea of being unequal to any exercise , so peremptorily refused to go out with her in the carriage , she could have no doubt -- putting every thing together -- that Jane was resolved to receive no kindness from _her_ .
The gruel came and supplied a great deal to be said -- much praise and many comments -- undoubting decision of its wholesomeness for every constitution , and pretty severe Philippics upon the many houses where it was never met with tolerable ;-- but , unfortunately , among the failures which the daughter had to instance , the most recent , and therefore most prominent , was in her own cook at South End , a young woman hired for the time , who never had been able to understand what she meant by a basin of nice smooth gruel , thin , but not too thin .
" But , Mr . Knightley , she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor , and I am sure she _will_ miss her more than she thinks for ."
I am sure they will bring him soon ."
Had he said any thing to bear a different construction , I should not have believed him ."
It will do you good to speak of your distress , whatever it may be ."
