He is the very best young man -- But , my dear Jane , if you remember , I told you yesterday he was precisely the height of Mr . Perry .
The next remove was to the house ; they must all go in and eat ;-- and they were all seated and busy , and still Frank Churchill did not come .
Good morning to you , my dear sir .
" Very true .-- Well , a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again , late at night , and cold as the nights are now .
I never was more surprized -- but it does not make me unhappy , I assure you .-- How -- how has it been possible ?"
I doubt whether my own sense would have corrected me without it ."
I perfectly understand your situation , however , Miss Woodhouse -- ( looking towards Mr . Woodhouse ), Your father ' s state of health must be a great drawback .
Mr . Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express ; and before he could make any reply , Mr . Woodhouse , whose thoughts were on the Bates ' s , said --
It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at Hartfield , which made their presence so acceptable ; for though her first remark , on reading it , was that " of course it must be declined ," she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do , that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful .
I cannot really change for the better .
-- for presently she came forward -- came quite up to me , and asked me how I did , and seemed ready to shake hands , if I would .
" Mr . Elton in love with me !-- What an idea !"
He was on foot , and after looking very respectfully at her , looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion .
CHAPTER I
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again .
Her situation should secure your compassion .
There was a bustle on her approach ; a good deal of moving and talking .
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin , it is impossible ; she has refused him , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application .
_Some_ _part_ of his conduct we cannot excuse ."
" Jane !"
The older a person grows , Harriet , the more important it is that their manners should not be bad ; the more glaring and disgusting any loudness , or coarseness , or awkwardness becomes .
She could not bear that her master should not be able to have another apple - tart this spring .
" Well !
you amuse me excessively .
Emma had not another word to oppose .
I think , Emma , I shall try and persuade her to stay longer with us .
cried Harriet , colouring , and astonished .
What !
In spite of all her faults , she knew she was dear to him ; might she not say , very dear ?-- When the suggestions of hope , however , which must follow here , presented themselves , she could not presume to indulge them .
" Emma ," said she , " this paper is worse than I expected .
His father would not own himself uneasy , and laughed at her fears ; but she could not be cured of wishing that he would part with his black mare .
For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself .
" She will not be surprized , papa , at least ."
" Here is something quite new to me .
I hope we shall have her here next week .
He loved to have the cloth laid , because it had been the fashion of his youth , but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing , his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat .
Your time has been properly and delicately spent , if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage .
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it .
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that , when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister , she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella ' s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane Fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
My nephews and nieces !-- I shall often have a niece with me ."
Most comfortable carriage .-- Oh !
Do you think I am right ?"
It was all general approbation and smoothness ; nothing delineated or distinguished .
" I am quite easy on that head ," replied Mrs . Weston .
They will have their barouche - landau , of course , which holds four perfectly ; and therefore , without saying any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
said he , ` I can fasten the rivet .
" Indeed !"
Nobody talked about it .
cried Harriet , coming eagerly into the room -- " is not this the oddest news that ever was ?"
He is an excellent young man , and will suit Harriet exactly ; it will be an ` Exactly so ,' as he says himself ; but he does sigh and languish , and study for compliments rather more than I could endure as a principal .
If Colonel Campbell is not the person , who can be ?"
She felt that , in quitting Donwell , he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits ; that in living constantly with her father , and in no house of his own , there would be much , very much , to be borne with .
A young lady who faints , must be recovered ; questions must be answered , and surprizes be explained .
I hope you turned directly ."
" With all my heart .
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days .
" Have you any idea of Mr . Knightley ' s returning your affection ?"
Mr . Knightley saw no such passion , and of course thought nothing of its effects ; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest ; and more than a reasonable , becoming degree of prudence , she was very sure did not belong to Mr . Elton .
" I am afraid we must be running away ," said Emma , glancing at Harriet , and beginning to rise --" My father will be expecting us .
I understand it was a very handsome letter , indeed .
Mr . Elton was all obligation and cheerfulness ; he was so very cheerful in his civilities indeed , that she began to think he must have received a different account of Harriet from what had reached her .
He only means --"
But her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed , she is so very reserved , so very unwilling to give the least information about any body , that I really think you may say what you like of your acquaintance with her ."
Let us have patience .
Can it be woman ?
It will give you every thing that you want -- consideration , independence , a proper home -- it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends , close to Hartfield and to me , and confirm our intimacy for ever .
My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration .
CHAPTER X
" Here comes this dear old beau of mine , I protest !-- Only think of his gallantry in coming away before the other men !-- what a dear creature he is ;-- I assure you I like him excessively .
" He was afraid they should have a very bad drive .
I told you that your suspicions would guide mine ."
With great indignation did he continue to observe him ; with great alarm and distrust , to observe also his two blinded companions .
" Cannot you , my dear Emma -- cannot you form a guess as to what you are to hear ?"
Mr . John Knightley smiled , and replied ,
Your views for Harriet are best known to yourself ; but as you make no secret of your love of match - making , it is fair to suppose that views , and plans , and projects you have ;-- and as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man , I think it will be all labour in vain ."
The next question was --
I am sure , a month ago , I had no more idea myself !-- The strangest things do take place !"
I have spent so many happy months there !
" Nonsense , errant nonsense , as ever was talked !"
Mr . Knightley , in fact , was one of the few people who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse , and the only one who ever told her of them : and though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself , she knew it would be so much less so to her father , that she would not have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect by every body .
" Well ," said Mrs . Weston , smiling , " you give him credit for more simple , disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do ; for while Miss Bates was speaking , a suspicion darted into my head , and I have never been able to get it out again .
She felt your full meaning .
It confesses that you have long understood me ."
He loved to have the cloth laid , because it had been the fashion of his youth , but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing , his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat .
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
you were perfectly right !
The thing is determined , that is ( laughing affectedly ) as far as I can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master .
Mr . Martin , I imagine , has his fortune entirely to make -- cannot be at all beforehand with the world .
Composure with a witness !
said he , turning his eyes towards Jane .
To Mr . John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility .
" Jane !"
It was a great consolation that Mr . Elton should not be really in love with her , or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappoint him -- that Harriet ' s nature should not be of that superior sort in which the feelings are most acute and retentive -- and that there could be no necessity for any body ' s knowing what had passed except the three principals , and especially for her father ' s being given a moment ' s uneasiness about it .
Had she intended ever to _marry_ him , it might have been worth while to pause and consider , and try to understand the value of his preference , and the character of his temper ; but for all the purposes of their acquaintance , he was quite amiable enough .
They walked together .
And I know he has read the Vicar of Wakefield .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
" Well , if you give me such kind encouragement , Mr . Elton , I believe I shall try what I can do .
Emma seriously hoped she would .
