A _Mrs . _ _Elton_ would be an excuse for any change of intercourse ; former intimacy might sink without remark .
said Miss Bates , joyfully ; " my mother is so pleased !-- she says she cannot bear to have the poor old Vicarage without a mistress .
What was to be done ?
I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere .
But is not this a sudden scheme ?"
Oh no !
CHAPTER II
" I have no doubt of it ."
" Harriet , poor Harriet !"
" News !
Ma ' am ," addressing her , " do you hear what Miss Woodhouse is so obliging to say about Jane ' s handwriting ?"
said I , ` I shall not forestall Jane ; I left her dancing with Mr . George Otway ; she will love to tell you all about it herself to - morrow : her first partner was Mr . Elton , I do not know who will ask her next , perhaps Mr . William Cox .'
I like him very well ."
" I shall hear about you all ," said he ; " that is my chief consolation .
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have .
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
A private dance , without sitting down to supper , was pronounced an infamous fraud upon the rights of men and women ; and Mrs . Weston must not speak of it again .
" By all means .
Mr . Weston must be quiet , and every thing deliberately arranged .
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
It would be a _secret_ satisfaction ; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thing Jane might communicate .
Emma could not suppose any such thing , knowing as she did , that both the Mr . Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself ;-- and two basins only were ordered .
made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some pages ago already .
.
" Such an imagination has crossed me , I own , Emma ; and if it never occurred to you before , you may as well take it into consideration now ."
I could not bear to have Henry supplanted .-- Mr . Knightley marry !-- No , I have never had such an idea , and I cannot adopt it now .
They will come and stand by my chair , and say , ` Grandpapa , can you give me a bit of string ?'
" But I ," he soon added , " who have had no such charm thrown over my senses , must still see , hear , and remember .
" Miss Fairfax was not well enough to write ;" and when Mr . Perry called at Hartfield , the same morning , it appeared that she was so much indisposed as to have been visited , though against her own consent , by himself , and that she was suffering under severe headaches , and a nervous fever to a degree , which made him doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs . Smallridge ' s at the time proposed .
.
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself , and living under !-- The blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !-- she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she was wretched , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness .
" You speak as if you envied him ."
Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith ' s being exactly the young friend she wanted -- exactly the something which her home required .
" That is what you have in your head , I know -- and what you would certainly say if my father were not by ."
I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivet quite firm .
" It will not do ," whispered Frank to Emma ; " they are most of them affronted .
She could not endure to give him the true explanation ; for though her suspicions were by no means removed , she was really ashamed of having ever imparted them .
They would catch worse colds at the Crown than anywhere ."
" I did not mean , I was not thinking of the slave - trade ," replied Jane ; " governess - trade , I assure you , was all that I had in view ; widely different certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on ; but as to the greater misery of the victims , I do not know where it lies .
CHAPTER VII
Only three of us .-- besides dear Jane at present -- and she really eats nothing -- makes such a shocking breakfast , you would be quite frightened if you saw it .
It was accepted ; and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell ' s family , and had lived with them entirely , only visiting her grandmother from time to time .
Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas , and hoped , by the help of backgammon , to get her father tolerably through the evening , and be attacked by no regrets but her own .
Mrs . Weston was disappointed .
" Well , go on ."
I am quite enough in love .
She was immediately up , and wanting to quit the table ; but so many were also moving , that she could not get away ; and Mr . Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her , and resolutely swept away by her unexamined .
Nobody could be so imprudent !
She promised him again and again to come -- much oftener than he doubted -- and was extremely gratified by such a proof of intimacy , such a distinguishing compliment as she chose to consider it .
with the help of spectacles .
As a magistrate , he had generally some point of law to consult John about , or , at least , some curious anecdote to give ; and as a farmer , as keeping in hand the home - farm at Donwell , he had to tell what every field was to bear next year , and to give all such local information as could not fail of being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally been the longest part of his life , and whose attachments were strong .
These were claims which he did not learn to overlook , though some years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax , before his own return to England put any thing in his power .
Kitty , a fair but frozen maid , Kindled a flame I yet deplore , The hood - wink ' d boy I called to aid , Though of his near approach afraid , So fatal to my suit before .
" Thank you , dear Miss Woodhouse , you are all kindness .-- It is impossible to say -- Yes , indeed , I quite understand -- dearest Jane ' s prospects -- that is , I do not mean .-- But she is charmingly recovered .-- How is Mr .
He had returned to a late dinner , and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over .
" Don ' t class us together , Harriet .
-- Those were the words ; in them lay the tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of , and which constituted the real misery of the business to her .
" I have made a most wretched discovery ," said he , after a short pause .-- " I have been here a week to - morrow -- half my time .
CHAPTER VIII
can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transfer his affections from Harriet to me ?-- Absurd and insufferable !"
I am sure she saw me , but she looked away directly , and took no notice ; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop ; and I kept sitting near the door !-- Oh !
She felt your full meaning .
We must go in the carriage , to be sure ."
His air and voice recovered their usual briskness : he shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand , and entered on the subject in a manner to prove , that he now only wanted time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing .
" What is the matter now ?"
There was too much domestic happiness in his brother ' s house ; woman wore too amiable a form in it ; Isabella was too much like Emma -- differing only in those striking inferiorities , which always brought the other in brilliancy before him , for much to have been done , even had his time been longer .-- He had stayed on , however , vigorously , day after day -- till this very morning ' s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax .-- Then , with the gladness which must be felt , nay , which he did not scruple to feel , having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma , was there so much fond solicitude , so much keen anxiety for her , that he could stay no longer .
She is pretty , and she is good tempered , and that is all .
" You will make my excuses , my dear , as civilly as possible .
I had not the least idea !-- Jane took Mrs . Elton aside , and told her at once , that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs . Smallridge ' s situation , she had come to the resolution of accepting it .-- I did not know a word of it till it was all settled ."
There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her .
A very few to - morrows stood between the young people of Highbury and happiness .
Isabella then went to Emma ; but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away ; and they were still discussing the point , when Mr . Knightley , who had left the room immediately after his brother ' s first report of the snow , came back again , and told them that he had been out of doors to examine , and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home , whenever they liked it , either now or an hour hence .
" Upon my word ," she cried , " the young man is determined not to lose any thing for want of asking .
I have the honour of being acquainted with a neighbour of yours , ( turning to Emma ,) a lady residing in or near Highbury ; a family of the name of Fairfax .
` My friend Knightley ' had been so often mentioned , that I was really impatient to see him ; and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his friend .
` Oh !
The error has been all my own ; and I do assure you that , with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear to give , I shall yet dread making the story known to Colonel Campbell .'"
As Mrs . Weston observed , " all young people would have their little whims ."
Dinner - parties and evening - parties were made for him and his lady ; and invitations flowed in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a disengaged day .
My dear Harriet , what do you mean ?
At least , however , I cannot be worse off than I should have been , if the other had been the person ; and now -- it _is_ possible --"
leave all that to me .
" Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately ?
Enscombe however was gracious , gracious in fact , if not in word .
Harriet unfolded the parcel , and she looked on with impatience .
One cannot have too large a party .
All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath ; and Emma said something very civil about the excellence of Miss Fairfax ' s handwriting .
Emma ' s project of forgetting Mr . Elton for a while made her rather sorry to find , when they had all taken their places , that he was close to her .
" Not I , indeed .
I think you play quite as well as she does .
Do you really think it a bad thing ?-- why so ?"
Another song , however , was soon begged for .
" Ah !
She would not look again .
I am no dancer ."
It will be as clean as Randalls by candlelight .
She was vexed .
These were pleasant feelings , and she walked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did , and collect round the strawberry - beds .-- The whole party were assembled , excepting Frank Churchill , who was expected every moment from Richmond ; and Mrs . Elton , in all her apparatus of happiness , her large bonnet and her basket , was very ready to lead the way in gathering , accepting , or talking -- strawberries , and only strawberries , could now be thought or spoken of .--" The best fruit in England -- every body ' s favourite -- always wholesome .-- These the finest beds and finest sorts .-- Delightful to gather for one ' s self -- the only way of really enjoying them .-- Morning decidedly the best time -- never tired -- every sort good -- hautboy infinitely superior -- no comparison -- the others hardly eatable -- hautboys very scarce -- Chili preferred -- white wood finest flavour of all -- price of strawberries in London -- abundance about Bristol -- Maple Grove -- cultivation -- beds when to be renewed -- gardeners thinking exactly different -- no general rule -- gardeners never to be put out of their way -- delicious fruit -- only too rich to be eaten much of -- inferior to cherries -- currants more refreshing -- only objection to gathering strawberries the stooping -- glaring sun -- tired to death -- could bear it no longer -- must go and sit in the shade ."
" And no great harm if it does ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
" That may be , and I may have seen him fifty times , but without having any idea of his name .
