-- with many other relative questions , all answered with patient politeness .
Well , I shall bring Jane with me -- Jane and her aunt .-- The rest I leave to you .
Oh !
He was looking about , he was going to the door , he was watching for the sound of other carriages ,-- impatient to begin , or afraid of being always near her .
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins ' s name was first mentioned in Highbury , before she was , by some means or other , discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when Mr . Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her Christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
" That ' s true ," she cried --" very true .
You said you had a great many , and now you have not one left .
Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf .
Jane desired me to do it , so I always do : and so I began to - day with my usual caution ; but no sooner did I come to the mention of her being unwell , than I burst out , quite frightened , with ` Bless me !
Mr . Elton had retreated into the card - room , looking ( Emma trusted ) very foolish .
Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within the daily circle -- but that is not the change I had in view for you .
It seemed to him a very ill - judged measure ."
As an old friend , you will allow me to hope , Miss Fairfax , that ten years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have ."
" I have not a fault to find with her person ," he replied .
" She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one ' s eyes from .
We do not often look upon fine young men , well - bred and agreeable .
Miss Woodhouse must excuse me .
And here I can admit , that my manners to Miss W ., in being unpleasant to Miss F ., were highly blameable .
She was pleased with the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan , and travel earlier , later , and quicker , that he might gain half a day .
I cannot doubt it .
I think very well of Mr . Elton , and this is the only way I have of doing him a service ."
It is like a woman ' s writing ."
This has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed .
Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering ; and by the ten days ' end , her nephew ' s letter to Randalls communicated a change of plan .
He is not a gallant man , but he is a very humane one ; and this , considering Jane Fairfax ' s ill - health , would appear a case of humanity to him ;-- and for an act of unostentatious kindness , there is nobody whom I would fix on more than on Mr . Knightley .
" Have you heard from her yourself this morning ?"
They are some of my very old friends .
She could never see a fault in any of them .
I am quite determined to refuse him .
You will know it all in time .
Every invitation was successful .
.
" And , upon my word , they have an air of great probability .
When I am quite determined as to the time , I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed .
Harriet had no penetration .
She had suffered very much from cramp after dancing , and her first attempt to mount the bank brought on such a return of it as made her absolutely powerless -- and in this state , and exceedingly terrified , she had been obliged to remain .
Oh !-- you need not be afraid of owning it to me , for Mr . Weston has told me himself .
" Very soon , very soon , indeed ; that ' s the worst of it .
" Had you any idea ," cried Harriet , " of his being in love with her ?-- You , perhaps , might .-- You ( blushing as she spoke ) who can see into every body ' s heart ; but nobody else --"
The difference which Randalls , Randalls alone makes in your goings - on , is very great ."
She knows their ways best ; but I should not consider their silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present .
" Mr . Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself ," said she .
" Oh !
Every body who saw it was pleased , but Mr . Elton was in continual raptures , and defended it through every criticism .
The misfortune of Harriet ' s cold had been pretty well gone through before her arrival .
Two or three more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them , and it was to be done in a quiet , unpretending , elegant way , infinitely superior to the bustle and preparation , the regular eating and drinking , and picnic parade of the Eltons and the Sucklings .
" Dear Mrs . Weston , how could you think of such a thing ?-- Mr .
Two steps , Jane , take care of the two steps .
Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault .
She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more than she could perform with credit ; she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable , and could accompany her own voice well .
She was then obliged to be finished , and make her appearance .
" And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any means certain .
You never wrote a truer line ."
" A house of her own !-- But where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
But he laughed so heartily at the recollection , that Emma could not help saying ,
to be a second time the dupe of her misconceptions and flattery .
If attention , in future , could do away the past , she might hope to be forgiven .
Books of engravings , drawers of medals , cameos , corals , shells , and every other family collection within his cabinets , had been prepared for his old friend , to while away the morning ; and the kindness had perfectly answered .
yes -- but how they were conveyed hither ?-- the manner of their coming ?"
She had all the natural grace of sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself .
Mr . Weston , do not mistake me .
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
Such a beautiful hind - quarter of pork !
CHAPTER XVII
No , we should not have heard , if it had not been for this particular circumstance , of her being to come here so soon .
was Mr . Woodhouse ' s first exclamation , and all that he could say for some time .
I never heard any county but Surry called so ."
" I am ready , if the others are ."
The less worthy females were to come in the evening , with Miss Bates , Miss Fairfax , and Miss Smith ; but already , at dinner , they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ; and , while politics and Mr . Elton were talked over , Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour .
By your account , he does seem to have had some scruples .
" That is ," replied Mr . Knightley , " she will indulge her even more than she did you , and believe that she does not indulge her at all .
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End .
She says I fidget her to death ; and Miss Woodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same .
Knightley ?"
" Whom are you going to dance with ?"
" If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill , I have heard that already ."
My dear Harriet , what are you thinking of ?
Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and flowers ; and has not Mrs . Weston some inimitable figure - pieces in her drawing - room , at Randalls ?"
Mrs . Weston , capital in her country - dances , was seated , and beginning an irresistible waltz ; and Frank Churchill , coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma , had secured her hand , and led her up to the top .
Some laughed , and answered good - humouredly .
But Miss Bates soon came --" Very happy and obliged "-- but Emma ' s conscience told her that there was not the same cheerful volubility as before -- less ease of look and manner .
Leave it all to me .
Emma smiled , and felt that Mr . Weston had very good reason for saying so .
" May I , indeed ?-- Then I will speak the truth , and nothing suits me so well .
" Why , pretty well ; but not quite well .
Bought at Weymouth , you know -- Mr . Dixon ' s choice .
And now , let me talk to you of something else .
Mrs . Perry was very anxious that he should have a carriage , and came to my mother in great spirits one morning because she thought she had prevailed .
If they are not put off , he cannot stir .
" You take up an idea , Mrs . Weston , and run away with it ; as you have many a time reproached me with doing .
Miss Churchill , however , being of age , and with the full command of her fortune -- though her fortune bore no proportion to the family - estate -- was not to be dissuaded from the marriage , and it took place , to the infinite mortification of Mr . and Mrs . Churchill , who threw her off with due decorum .
Not heard of you !-- I believe Mrs . Weston ' s letters lately have been full of very little else than Mrs .
He has no occasion to marry , either to fill up his time or his heart ."
You must be the best judge of your own happiness .
It did appear -- there was no concealing it -- exactly like the pretence of being in love with her , instead of Harriet ; an inconstancy , if real , the most contemptible and abominable !
It was her superior duty .
But how shall I do ?
" Henry is a fine boy , but John is very like his mama .
" I know nothing of the large parties of London , sir -- I never dine with any body ."
Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared ; but if this reflected at all upon his impatience , his sorrowful look and total want of spirits when he did come might redeem him .
