I am here till claimed by Colonel and Mrs .
" Certainly ; you must be sensible that the last half - year has made a great difference in your way of life ."
" Ah !
I am exceedingly obliged to you , Mrs . Elton , I am obliged to any body who feels for me , but I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer .
They are not far off .
I could not have visited Mrs . Robert Martin , of Abbey - Mill Farm .
She felt for Harriet , with pain and with contrition ; but no flight of generosity run mad , opposing all that could be probable or reasonable , entered her brain .
" Mr . Knightley was there too , was he ?"
Poor Mr . Woodhouse was silent from consternation ; but every body else had something to say ; every body was either surprized or not surprized , and had some question to ask , or some comfort to offer .
Yet he would speak .
If meant to be immediately mixed with the others , and buried from sight , she should have looked on the table instead of looking just across , for it was not mixed ; and Harriet , eager after every fresh word , and finding out none , directly took it up , and fell to work .
He is an excellent young man , both as son and brother .
" Something has happened to delay her ; some visitors perhaps ."
I must get rid of every thing .-- There it goes , and there is an end , thank Heaven !
" She will think Frank ought to ask her ."
Cole ."
It seemed at first an accidental division , but it never materially varied .
To guess what all this meant , was impossible even for Emma .
But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man she cared for .
I had not thought of it before , but that is the best way .
Sometimes Mr . Elton predominated , sometimes the Martins ; and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other .
" Much , indeed !"
Selina is no fine lady , I assure you .
One man ' s style must not be the rule of another ' s .
Then changing from a frown to a smile --" No , do not tell me -- I do not want to know what you mean .-- Where is my father ?-- When are we to begin dancing ?"
He saw his son every year in London , and was proud of him ; and his fond report of him as a very fine young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too .
" Only one more , papa ; only for Mr . Elton .
" From the very circumstance of its being larger , sir .
I do not advise the custard .
replied Miss Bates .
She is very timid and silent .
As they were turning into the grounds , Mr . Perry passed by on horseback .
Very thoughtful of Colonel Campbell , was not it ?-- He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music here .
Instances have been known of young people passing many , many months successively , without being at any ball of any description , and no material injury accrue either to body or mind ;-- but when a beginning is made -- when the felicities of rapid motion have once been , though slightly , felt -- it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more .
" Oh !
" To fall in with each other on such an errand as this ," thought Emma ; " to meet in a charitable scheme ; this will bring a great increase of love on each side .
" To a Mrs . Smallridge -- charming woman -- most superior -- to have the charge of her three little girls -- delightful children .
After much thinking , she could determine on nothing better , than Harriet ' s returning the visit ; but in a way that , if they had understanding , should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance .
Mr . Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury , and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed , though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life .
" No , I have not ; I know nothing ; pray tell me ."
" Happy couple !"
Emma had not to listen to such paradings again -- to any so exclusively addressed to herself -- so disgustingly decorated with a " dear Miss Woodhouse ."
No sacrifice on any side worth the name .
What do you think of him ?
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself ; Mr . Martin may be the richest of the two , but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society .-- The sphere in which she moves is much above his .-- It would be a degradation ."
I have not the smallest doubt of the issue .
What I said just now , meant nothing .
Other poultry - yards in the neighbourhood also suffered .-- Pilfering was _housebreaking_ to Mr . Woodhouse ' s fears .-- He was very uneasy ; and but for the sense of his son - in - law ' s protection , would have been under wretched alarm every night of his life .
It must be very clever , or he would not have brought it .
I assure you , Jane Fairfax is a very delightful character , and interests me more than I can express ."
Mrs . Elton , very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her by such a hope , smiled most graciously .
Her attention was now claimed by Mr . Woodhouse , who being , according to his custom on such occasions , making the circle of his guests , and paying his particular compliments to the ladies , was ending with her -- and with all his mildest urbanity , said ,
" Depend upon it , Emma , a sensible man would find no difficulty in it .
but why so ?-- I can hardly imagine that any thing which pleases or amuses you , should not please and amuse me too ."
The backgammon - table was placed ; but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary .
I assure you I have no doubt of its doing Mr . Woodhouse good ."
Emma even jumped with surprize ;-- and , horror - struck , exclaimed ,
Miss Woodhouse !
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma , Mr .
I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it .
Think , then , what I must have endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltons with all the vulgarity of needless repetition , and all the insolence of imaginary superiority .
" Mr . Wingfield most strenuously recommended it , sir -- or we should not have gone .
" Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would ."
" I am very much astonished , Mr . Elton .
It was a concern which brought just employment enough .
" With all my heart .
After much thinking , she could determine on nothing better , than Harriet ' s returning the visit ; but in a way that , if they had understanding , should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison , while a sharer of his conversation with her friend ; and from the best , the purest of motives , might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland , and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty .
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind : I really believe , if she had only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ; and nobody is afraid of her : that is a great charm ."
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor ' s merits , without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse ' s character , than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor ' s .
Oh yes , Friday or Saturday next .
" No -- I have never seen Mr . Elton ," she replied , starting on this appeal ; " is he -- is he a tall man ?"
-- which my mother , being on the watch , heard distinctly , and was sadly alarmed at .
no , now I recollect , now I have it ; something happened before tea , but not that .
CHAPTER XII
CHAPTER X
" How I could so long a time be fancying myself !
Mr . Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catching her eye -- he seemed watching her intently -- in vain , however , if it were so -- Jane passed between them into the hall , and looked at neither .
This event had very lately taken place ; too lately for any thing to be yet attempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path of duty ; though she had now reached the age which her own judgment had fixed on for beginning .
She must know as well as her father , how acceptable an instrument would be ; and perhaps the mode of it , the mystery , the surprize , is more like a young woman ' s scheme than an elderly man ' s .
I need not so totally despair of an equal alliance , as to be addressing myself to Miss Smith !-- No , madam , my visits to Hartfield have been for yourself only ; and the encouragement I received --"
If I meet with no insuperable difficulties therefore , consider that point as settled ."
Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol -- merchant , of course , he must be called ; but , as the whole of the profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate , it was not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also .
He could now , without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise , without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest , give way to all his natural kind - hearted civility in solicitous inquiries after Mr . Frank Churchill ' s accommodation on his journey , through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road , and express very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catching cold -- which , however , he could not allow him to feel quite assured of himself till after another night .
Sixteen miles -- nay , eighteen -- it must be full eighteen to Manchester - street -- was a serious obstacle .
She looked on with some amusement .-- Miss Bates ' s gratitude for Mrs . Elton ' s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless simplicity and warmth .
" No ," said Mr . Knightley , nearly at the same time ; " you are not often deficient ; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension .
Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent , which no doubt he was in the habit of receiving , to emulate the " Very true , my love ," which must have been usually administered by his travelling companion ; but she had resolution enough to refrain from making any answer at all .
Presently Mr . Knightley looked back , and came and sat down by her .
So unlike what a man should be !-- None of that upright integrity , that strict adherence to truth and principle , that disdain of trick and littleness , which a man should display in every transaction of his life ."
You and I must positively exert our authority ."
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt , of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry ; the pleasure of looking at somebody new ; the gala - day to Highbury entire , which the sight of him would have made ; and ending with reflections on the Churchills again , found herself directly involved in a disagreement with Mr . Knightley ; and , to her great amusement , perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion , and making use of Mrs . Weston ' s arguments against herself .
" You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax , sir , are you ?"
They all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they were just growing again like themselves , ( Harriet , as Emma must suspect , as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy ,) when the carriage reappeared , and all was over .
.
The two eldest little Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring , and their papa now proposed bringing them , and staying one whole day at Hartfield -- which one day would be the very day of this party .-- His professional engagements did not allow of his being put off , but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening so .
She had taken up a wrong idea , fancying it was a mother and daughter , a son and son ' s wife , who all lived together ; but when it appeared that the Mr . Martin , who bore a part in the narrative , and was always mentioned with approbation for his great good - nature in doing something or other , was a single man ; that there was no young Mrs . Martin , no wife in the case ; she did suspect danger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality and kindness , and that , if she were not taken care of , she might be required to sink herself forever .
said Emma , laughing .
She understood it all ; and as far as her mind could disengage itself from the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings , she acknowledged that Jane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her desert .
