I hope I know better now , than to care for Mr . Martin , or to be suspected of it ."
Walk home !-- you are prettily shod for walking home , I dare say .
She never had been so depressed .
My heart was in Highbury , and my business was to get my body thither as often as might be , and with the least suspicion .
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
` You and I must part .
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man , for she hardly knew what indisposition was ; and if he did not invent illnesses for her , she could make no figure in a message .
It was a clear thing he was less in love than he had been .
And when I brought out the baked apples from the closet , and hoped our friends would be so very obliging as to take some , ` Oh !'
What a horrible idea !
Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal .-- No judge of his own manners by you .-- Always deceived in fact by his own wishes , and regardless of little besides his own convenience .-- Fancying you to have fathomed his secret .
Mr . Frank Churchill still declined it , looking as serious as he could , and his father gave his hearty support by calling out , " My good friend , this is quite unnecessary ; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it , and as to Mrs . Bates ' s , he may get there from the Crown in a hop , step , and jump ."
He contrived that she should be seated by him ; and was sufficiently employed in looking out the best baked apple for her , and trying to make her help or advise him in his work , till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to the pianoforte again .
How will a conundrum reckon ?"
a man does not imagine any such thing .
She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing , and Mr . Weston instantly seized the opportunity of going on .
Her attention was now claimed by Mr . Woodhouse , who being , according to his custom on such occasions , making the circle of his guests , and paying his particular compliments to the ladies , was ending with her -- and with all his mildest urbanity , said ,
" You are expecting her again , you say , this morning ?"
Knightley must never marry .
Upon the whole , Emma left her with such softened , charitable feelings , as made her look around in walking home , and lament that Highbury afforded no young man worthy of giving her independence ; nobody that she could wish to scheme about for her .
What say you to Mr . Weston and Mr . Elton ?
To take a dislike to a young man , only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself , was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him ; for with all the high opinion of himself , which she had often laid to his charge , she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another .
For Miss ----------, read Miss Smith .
So would poor little Harriet .
Now was the time for Mr . Frank Churchill to come among them ; and the hope strengthened when it was understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion .
" He may have a great deal of influence on some points ," continued Mrs . Weston , " and on others , very little : and among those , on which she is beyond his reach , it is but too likely , may be this very circumstance of his coming away from them to visit us ."
On their first coming into the country , they had lived in proportion to their income , quietly , keeping little company , and that little unexpensively ; but the last year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means -- the house in town had yielded greater profits , and fortune in general had smiled on them .
Her attention was now claimed by Mr . Woodhouse , who being , according to his custom on such occasions , making the circle of his guests , and paying his particular compliments to the ladies , was ending with her -- and with all his mildest urbanity , said ,
Nothing can stand more retired from the road than Maple Grove .
CHAPTER X
No -- till Cole alluded to my supposed attachment , it had never entered my head .
Now , however , I see nothing in it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion .
no , I am sure you are a great deal too kind to -- but if you would just advise me what I had best do -- No , no , I do not mean that -- As you say , one ' s mind ought to be quite made up -- One should not be hesitating -- It is a very serious thing .-- It will be safer to say ` No ,' perhaps .-- Do you think I had better say ` No ?'"
Mrs . Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion .
I shall only just mention the circumstance to the others in a common way ."
Pray , pray attempt it .
I never can be blameless .
She checked herself , however , and submitted quietly to a little more praise than she deserved .
To amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for -- and Emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could very well describe .
She checked herself , however , and submitted quietly to a little more praise than she deserved .
If they are not put off , he cannot stir .
their luxury and ease .
How can she find any appellation for them , deep enough in familiar vulgarity ?
Mrs . Weston remained with Mr . Woodhouse .
" Ah !
They arrived .-- Mrs .
I like a job of that sort excessively .'
Now I cannot say , that I think you are any of you looking well at present ."
As it was , I was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit .
" I have no doubt of their being happy together ," said Emma ; " I believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached ."
They were sneering and negligent .
We are growing a little too nice .
Mr . John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother .
Mr . Wingfield told me that he has never known them more general or heavy -- except when it has been quite an influenza ."
" Quite seasonable ; and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin yesterday , and prevent this day ' s party , which it might very possibly have done , for Mr . Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been much snow on the ground ; but now it is of no consequence .
Her own conduct , as well as her own heart , was before her in the same few minutes .
Poor Miss Bates may very likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greater appearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated , in spite of the very natural wish of a little change ."
Mrs . Perry had told somebody , and was extremely happy about it .
Emma had hardly expected them : for Mr . Weston , who had called in for half a minute , in order to hear that his son was very handsome , knew nothing of their plans ; and it was an agreeable surprize to her , therefore , to perceive them walking up to the house together , arm in arm .
dear Mrs . Elton , so obliged to you for the carriage !-- excellent time .
It was a very extraordinary thing !
" John does not even mention your friend ," said Mr . Knightley .
His wife gave him a look which invited him in ; and , while he was coming round , added , " Now , dearest Emma , let me intreat you to say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease , and incline him to be satisfied with the match .
His rank in society I would alter if I could , which is saying a great deal I assure you , Emma .-- You laugh at me about William Larkins ; but I could quite as ill spare Robert Martin ."
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
The man must be a blockhead who wanted more .
Dining once with the Coles -- and having a ball talked of , which never took place .
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
How do you do , Miss Smith ?-- Very well I thank you .-- And I begged Mrs . Weston to come with me , that I might be sure of succeeding ."
" Oh !
This was all that was generally known of her history .
And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet ' s sake ; if he were to be thought of hereafter , as finding in Harriet ' s society all that he wanted ; if Harriet were to be the chosen , the first , the dearest , the friend , the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings of existence ; what could be increasing Emma ' s wretchedness but the reflection never far distant from her mind , that it had been all her own work ?
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
She had never rejoiced at the sound before , nor ever before entered the passage , nor walked up the stairs , with any wish of giving pleasure , but in conferring obligation , or of deriving it , except in subsequent ridicule .
Emma could not resist .
It is natural , and it is honourable .-- Yes , honourable , I think , to chuse so well and so gratefully .-- But that it will be a fortunate preference is more that I can promise .
Dixon in them ."
Miss Bates was very chatty and good - humoured , as she always is , though she speaks rather too quick .
Emma was in no danger of forgetting .
I heard a good deal of Colonel Campbell ' s taste at Weymouth ; and the softness of the upper notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would particularly prize .
It is not that I am without the wish ; but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should put - to for such a purpose ."
How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield had been a continual impediment -- less acknowledged by Mr . Weston than by herself -- but even he had never been able to finish the subject better than by saying --" Those matters will take care of themselves ; the young people will find a way ."
The listeners were amused ; and Mrs . Weston gave Emma a look of particular meaning .
Indeed I must say that , much as I had heard of him before and much as I had expected , he very far exceeds any thing .
If attention , in future , could do away the past , she might hope to be forgiven .
" It would be very hard , indeed , my dear , if poor Isabella were to be anywhere but at Hartfield ."
The lane made a slight bend ; and when that bend was passed , Mr . Elton was immediately in sight ; and so near as to give Emma time only to say farther ,
" That ' s right , my dear , very right .
" Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning ?-- Do , if it be possible .
It has been so many years my province to give advice , that you cannot be surprized , Mr . Knightley , at this little remains of office ."
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella ' s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him -- and he has been here a whole year , and has fitted up his house so comfortably , that it would be a shame to have him single any longer -- and I thought when he was joining their hands to - day , he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him !
" Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old .
My dear sir , you are too obliging .-- Is there nobody you would not rather ?-- I am not helpless .
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are .
I never heard any county but Surry called so ."
He listened in perfect silence .
Emma could not deplore her future absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment .
She had no visible friends but what had been acquired at Highbury , and was now just returned from a long visit in the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her .
What do you think of him ?
