He should like to see the old house again exceedingly , and should be very happy to meet Mr . and Mrs . Elton , and any other of his neighbours .-- He could not see any objection at all to his , and Emma ' s , and Harriet ' s going there some very fine morning .
" I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr . Elton .
And when one considers the variety of hands , and of bad hands too , that are to be deciphered , it increases the wonder ."
He stopped .-- Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs . Weston , and did not herself know what to think .
The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect of Harriet ' s welfare , she was really in danger of becoming too happy for security .-- What had she to wish for ?
replied Mrs . Weston , smiling , " what is the certainty of caprice ?"
She was sure of Mrs . Weston ' s wishing it to be communicated ; especially to one , who , like Mr . Knightley , had seen so much to blame in his conduct .
No indeed !-- There was not a hint of Mr . Martin .
It was a very extraordinary thing !
My dear sir , you are too obliging .-- Is there nobody you would not rather ?-- I am not helpless .
Such expressions , assisted as they were by every thing that look and manner could do , made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so well , nor valued her affection so highly before .
Mrs . Elton then said , " Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do -- but upon such an occasion as this , when every body ' s eyes are so much upon me , and in compliment to the Westons -- who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour -- I would not wish to be inferior to others .
" What is this ?-- What is this ?"
A line from me would bring you a little host of acquaintance ; and my particular friend , Mrs . Partridge , the lady I have always resided with when in Bath , would be most happy to shew you any attentions , and would be the very person for you to go into public with ."
" It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined !
Happily it was not necessary to speak .
with the help of spectacles .
Mrs . Elton eagerly interposed with ,
A mind like hers , once opening to suspicion , made rapid progress .
Mrs . Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses , in order to hear the new instrument .
That would have been too dreadful !-- What an escape !-- Dear Miss Woodhouse , I would not give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for any thing in the world ."
she was going to exclaim ; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends , who were coming , like herself , by particular desire , to help Mr . Weston ' s judgment ; and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins , who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness , on the same errand , that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection .
" Oh !
-- Even Mr . Weston shook his head , and looked solemn , and said , " Ah !
Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former good old days of the room ?-- She who could do any thing in Highbury !
Not that I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto .
Her affection must have overpowered her judgment ."
He appeared to have a very open temper -- certainly a very cheerful and lively one ; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions , a great deal decidedly right ; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard , was fond of talking of him -- said he would be the best man in the world if he were left to himself ; and though there was no being attached to the aunt , he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude , and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect .
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor married .
He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte , and turning to Emma , said ,
He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion , by giving her very proper attention , after the introduction had passed .
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to - day ."
It was as much as Emma could bear , without being impolite .
" I had a few lines on parish business from Mr . Weston this morning , and at the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened ."
We shall have no occasion to open the windows at all -- not once the whole evening ; and it is that dreadful habit of opening the windows , letting in cold air upon heated bodies , which ( as you well know , sir ) does the mischief ."
and I have often wished -- but it is so little one can venture to do -- small , trifling presents , of any thing uncommon -- Now we have killed a porker , and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg ; it is very small and delicate -- Hartfield pork is not like any other pork -- but still it is pork -- and , my dear Emma , unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks , nicely fried , as ours are fried , without the smallest grease , and not roast it , for no stomach can bear roast pork -- I think we had better send the leg -- do not you think so , my dear ?"
" Oh no !
She promised to think of it , and advised him to think of it more ; but he was fully convinced , that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject .
Peculiarly lucky !-- for as to any real knowledge of a person ' s disposition that Bath , or any public place , can give -- it is all nothing ; there can be no knowledge .
There was always sufficient reason for such an attention ; Mrs . and Miss Bates loved to be called on , and she knew she was considered by the very few who presumed ever to see imperfection in her , as rather negligent in that respect , and as not contributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts .
He was soon pretty well resigned .
She might talk on ; and if he wanted to say any thing himself , he would only talk louder , and drown her voice .
" She thinks herself wrong , then , for having consented to a private engagement ?"
Such things in general cannot be too short ."
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
She did most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood -- and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half .
They are not at all the less written you know , because you divide them .
I have read worse charades .
How directly , how strongly had he expressed himself to her on the subject !-- Not too strongly for the offence -- but far , far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer than upright justice and clear - sighted goodwill .-- She had no hope , nothing to deserve the name of hope , that he could have that sort of affection for herself which was now in question ; but there was a hope ( at times a slight one , at times much stronger ,) that Harriet might have deceived herself , and be overrating his regard for _her_ .-- Wish it she must , for his sake -- be the consequence nothing to herself , but his remaining single all his life .
" He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as he passed -- he had not stopped , he would not stop for more than a word -- but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he did not call , and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield , he must hurry off ."
repeated Emma .
Her care and attention could not be questioned ; they were , in fact , only too great .
VOLUME III
A disagreeable truth would be palatable through her lips , but I am the wretchedest being in the world at a civil falsehood ."
It ought to have been a habit with him by this time , of following his duty , instead of consulting expediency .
And at last , as if resolved to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object , he wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person .
the proper sport of boys and girls , but a single woman , of good fortune , is always respectable , and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else .
" No , my dear , I never encouraged any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
You divert me against my conscience .
here ' s Miss Woodhouse .-- Dear Miss Woodhouse , how do you do ?-- Very well I thank you , quite well .
Thank you , my mother is remarkably well .
.
" Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day , out of so few , in having your hair cut ."
My perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have been so much out of humour before ."
Mrs . Weston was very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he made himself -- how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether .
She was not obliged to hear .
Of course , he must be sorry to lose her -- they must be all sorry .
Knightley ' s words dwelt with her .
I could not stay two minutes .
Mr . Woodhouse had been exceedingly well amused .
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her , and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party the last half of the way ; but his alarms were needless ; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished , and Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , their five children , and a competent number of nursery - maids , all reaching Hartfield in safety .
He had met with them in a little perplexity , which must be laid before Emma .
I want to puzzle you again ."
Mr . Weston directed the whole , officiating safely between Hartfield and the Vicarage , and every body was in good time .
The style of the letter was much above her expectation .
Every door was now closed , the passage plan given up , and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again ; and with such good - will on Frank Churchill ' s part , that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple , was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten .
A bride , you know , my dear , is always the first in company , let the others be who they may ."
and she had difficulty in behaving with temper .
They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival .
To amuse her , and be agreeable in her eyes , seemed all that he cared for -- and Emma , glad to be enlivened , not sorry to be flattered , was gay and easy too , and gave him all the friendly encouragement , the admission to be gallant , which she had ever given in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance ; but which now , in her own estimation , meant nothing , though in the judgment of most people looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word but flirtation could very well describe .
" You may _say_ what you chuse -- but your countenance testifies that your _thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine ."
CHAPTER V
And dear Emma , too !-- What a dreadful loss to you both !-- I have been so grieved for you .-- I could not imagine how you could possibly do without her .-- It is a sad change indeed .-- But I hope she is pretty well , sir ."
It must be done directly ; it must be done in London ; the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could be depended on ; and Isabella , the usual doer of all commissions , must not be applied to , because it was December , and Mr . Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December .
She was proved to have been universally mistaken ; and she had not quite done nothing -- for she had done mischief .
" Indeed , I am very sorry to be right in this instance .
He called her ` Augusta .'
Knightley .--" Emma , that I fear is a word -- No , I have no wish -- Stay , yes , why should I hesitate ?-- I have gone too far already for concealment .-- Emma , I accept your offer -- Extraordinary as it may seem , I accept it , and refer myself to you as a friend .-- Tell me , then , have I no chance of ever succeeding ?"
In her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her .
" Yes ," he replied , " any body may know how highly I think of her ."
There were three others , Jane says , which they hesitated about some time .
He saw a short word prepared for Emma , and given to her with a look sly and demure .
" Yes ," said Mr . John Knightley presently , with some slyness , " he seems to have a great deal of good - will towards you ."
He must have had a wet ride .-- Yes .-- He meant to walk with her , she found .
Must go and speak to Dr . and Mrs . Hughes for a moment .-- How do you do ?
I have not forgotten it , I assure you .-- Deceived myself , I did very miserably deceive you -- and it will be a painful reflection to me for ever .
Grandmama was quite well , had a charming evening with Mr . Woodhouse , a vast deal of chat , and backgammon .-- Tea was made downstairs , biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came away : amazing luck in some of her throws : and she inquired a great deal about you , how you were amused , and who were your partners .
Latterly , however -- for some time , indeed -- I have had no idea of their meaning any thing .-- I thought them a habit , a trick , nothing that called for seriousness on my side .
" So scrupulous for others ," he continued , " and yet so careless for herself !
I saw the word , and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining to the one , and so very distressing to the other ."
