Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
" But , my dear sir , the difference of the journey ;-- only consider how great it would have been .-- An hundred miles , perhaps , instead of forty ."
When she took in her history , indeed , her situation , as well as her beauty ; when she considered what all this elegance was destined to , what she was going to sink from , how she was going to live , it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect ; especially , if to every well - known particular entitling her to interest , were added the highly probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr . Dixon , which she had so naturally started to herself .
She longed for the serenity they might gradually introduce ; and on Mr . Perry ' s coming in soon after dinner , with a disengaged hour to give her father , she lost no time ill hurrying into the shrubbery .-- There , with spirits freshened , and thoughts a little relieved , she had taken a few turns , when she saw Mr . Knightley passing through the garden door , and coming towards her .-- It was the first intimation of his being returned from London .
Her mind was in a state of flutter and wonder , which made it impossible for her to be collected .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
But it would not do ; he had not come to the point .
But as to my _letting_ her marry Robert Martin , it is impossible ; she has refused him , and so decidedly , I think , as must prevent any second application .
Such , for half an hour , was the conversation -- interrupted only once by Mrs . Weston , who came out , in her solicitude after her son - in - law , to inquire if he were come -- and she was a little uneasy .-- She had some fears of his horse .
Perhaps to Hartfield , perhaps to the Abbey Mill , perhaps into his woods .-- Miss Woodhouse , this is not like our friend Knightley !-- Can you explain it ?"
I do not look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged .
( looking round with the most good - humoured dependence on every body ' s assent )-- Do not you all think I shall ?"
Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming Miss Taylor ' s judgment , but directed chiefly by her own .
They _shall_ talk .
Jane , don ' t you remember grandmama ' s telling us of it when we got home ?
" Aye , very true .
" By all means .
" Oh !
Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , from having been longer than usual absent from Surry , were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest .
" Yes ; my father is to join me here : we shall walk back together , and I must be off immediately .
I thought him very plain at first , but I do not think him so plain now .
Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury , and longed to dance again ; and the last half - hour of an evening which Mr . Woodhouse was persuaded to spend with his daughter at Randalls , was passed by the two young people in schemes on the subject .
He had met with them in a little perplexity , which must be laid before Emma .
to look on , while repeated attentions were offering to another woman , before her face , and not resent it .-- That is a degree of placidity , which I can neither comprehend nor respect ."
There was no resisting such news , no possibility of avoiding the influence of such a happy face as Mr . Weston ' s , confirmed as it all was by the words and the countenance of his wife , fewer and quieter , but not less to the purpose .
" What does all that signify ?
Tell me , I charge you tell me this moment what it is ."
" You may well class the delight , the honour , and the comfort of such a situation together ," said Jane , " they are pretty sure to be equal ; however , I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at present for me .
I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , it is very delightful to me , to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove .
And it always ended in " Kitty , a fair but frozen maid ."
As Harriet described it , there had been an interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour .
Married women , you know , may be safely authorised .
You do not know it I dare say , but two or three years ago I had a great passion for taking likenesses , and attempted several of my friends , and was thought to have a tolerable eye in general .
When you have been here a little longer , Miss Fairfax , you will understand that Mr . Elton is the standard of perfection in Highbury , both in person and mind ."
" I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter .
She was sensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment from herself ."
" Did she know ?-- had she heard any thing about her , since their being at Randalls ?-- he felt much anxiety -- he must confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably ."
" Aye , that ' s very just , indeed , that ' s very properly said .
Emma was out of hearing .
He had reached Randalls the evening before .
She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl , which she trusted , with such frequent meetings at Hartfield , was foundation enough on his side ; and on Harriet ' s there could be little doubt that the idea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy .
" While her dear father lived , any change of condition must be impossible for her .
" My dearest Harriet !"
As a daughter , she hoped she was not without a heart .
It did appear -- there was no concealing it -- exactly like the pretence of being in love with her , instead of Harriet ; an inconstancy , if real , the most contemptible and abominable !
I am sure she will be as happy to see her friends at Highbury , as they can be to see her .
How unlucky !
She was so surprized she did not know what to do .
He wished the road might be impassable , that he might be able to keep them all at Randalls ; and with the utmost good - will was sure that accommodation might be found for every body , calling on his wife to agree with him , that with a little contrivance , every body might be lodged , which she hardly knew how to do , from the consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house .
" Ah !
What I said just now , meant nothing .
Knightley ' s .-- Alas !
It is a necessary of life to me ; and having always been used to a very musical society , both at Maple Grove and in Bath , it would have been a most serious sacrifice .
.
" But , my dear papa , it is supposed to be summer ; a warm day in summer .
One cannot wonder , one cannot wonder .
Seldom , very seldom , does complete truth belong to any human disclosure ; seldom can it happen that something is not a little disguised , or a little mistaken ; but where , as in this case , though the conduct is mistaken , the feelings are not , it may not be very material .-- Mr . Knightley could not impute to Emma a more relenting heart than she possessed , or a heart more disposed to accept of his .
He could not see her in a situation of such danger , without trying to preserve her .
said Emma again .
" Not the least in the world .-- Did he ever give you any thing ?"
She could not think that Harriet ' s solace or her own sins required more ; and she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they returned ;-- but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded , and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter , and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive -- " Mr . Elton is so good to the poor !"
He loves any thing of the sort , and especially any thing that pays woman a compliment .
_Now_ you have nothing to try for .
He never wished to attach me .
Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
" Come ," said she , " I will tell you something , in return for what you have told me .
And as for Mrs . Hodges , Wright holds her very cheap indeed .-- She promised Wright a receipt , and never sent it ."
What a blessing it is , when undue influence does not survive the grave !-- He gave his consent with very little persuasion ."
I hope you will be pleased with my son ; but you must not expect a prodigy .
It saves trouble , and is a something to get me out .
But it would not do ; he had not come to the point .
" So far as that it relates to Mr . Frank Churchill , I do guess ."
The less worthy females were to come in the evening , with Miss Bates , Miss Fairfax , and Miss Smith ; but already , at dinner , they were too numerous for any subject of conversation to be general ; and , while politics and Mr . Elton were talked over , Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to the pleasantness of her neighbour .
There is no use in delay .
` Well ,' said she , ` it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now .'
He did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs . Weston ; but , undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter .
" I promise you to make none for myself , papa ; but I must , indeed , for other people .
They had been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before , and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence .
He seemed by this connexion between the families , quite to belong to her .
You made a lucky guess ; and _that_ is all that can be said ."
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
Mr . Frank Churchill did not come .
But now she made the sudden resolution of not passing their door without going in -- observing , as she proposed it to Harriet , that , as well as she could calculate , they were just now quite safe from any letter from Jane Fairfax .
She knew a family near Maple Grove who had tried it , and been obliged to separate before the end of the first quarter .
I wonder which she will think the handsomest , Henry or John ?"
It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax , whose prospects were closing , while Harriet ' s opened , and whose engagements now allowed of no delay in any one at Highbury , who wished to shew her kindness -- and with Emma it was grown into a first wish .
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest , his thoughts full of what he had seen ; so full , that when the candles came to assist his observations , he must -- yes , he certainly must , as a friend -- an anxious friend -- give Emma some hint , ask her some question .
" I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you ," said Mr . Weston .
The heat overcame me ."
I will fetch your greatcoat and open the garden door for you ."
Oh !
" They would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding - screen from London , which they hoped might keep Mr . Woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company ."
She considered -- resolved -- and , trying to smile , began --
Was it impossible ?-- No .-- Harriet undoubtedly was greatly his inferior in understanding ; but he had been very much struck with the loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her manner ; and all the probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour .-- For Harriet , it would be advantageous and delightful indeed .
CHAPTER III
But the case is altered now .
Mr . Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make ; which was exactly the case ; for though very much gratified by the kind care of such a fair lady , and not liking to resist any advice of her ' s , he had not really the least inclination to give up the visit ;-- but Emma , too eager and busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear him impartially , or see him with clear vision , was very well satisfied with his muttering acknowledgment of its being " very cold , certainly very cold ," and walked on , rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls , and secured him the power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening .
I did not know what to do .
And it is so cheerful a place , that it could not fail of being of use to Mr . Woodhouse ' s spirits , which , I understand , are sometimes much depressed .
