Instead of drawing his brother off to a window while they waited for dinner , he was talking to Miss Fairfax .
You must think one five hundred million times more above me than the other .
I am exceedingly obliged to you , Mrs . Elton , I am obliged to any body who feels for me , but I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till the summer .
-- And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent , such boastful pretence of amazement , that she could not help replying with quickness ,
" What can it be , Miss Woodhouse ?-- what can it be ?
Late hours do not agree with us .
His first proposition and request , that the dance begun at Mr . Cole ' s should be finished there -- that the same party should be collected , and the same musician engaged , met with the readiest acquiescence .
" She could not compose herself -- Mr . Woodhouse would be alarmed -- she had better go ;"-- with most ready encouragement from her friend , therefore , she passed off through another door -- and the moment she was gone , this was the spontaneous burst of Emma ' s feelings : " Oh God !
It is always the lady ' s right to decide on the degree of acquaintance .
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
" Good or bad ?"
said I , ` I shall not forestall Jane ; I left her dancing with Mr . George Otway ; she will love to tell you all about it herself to - morrow : her first partner was Mr . Elton , I do not know who will ask her next , perhaps Mr . William Cox .'
After a few minutes of entire silence between them , John Knightley began with --
He was wishing to confide in her -- perhaps to consult her ;-- cost her what it would , she would listen .
It was not possible that the occurrence should not be strongly recommending each to the other .
Emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject .
This letter , however , was written , and sealed , and sent .
We had great amusement with those letters one morning .
Harriet , who had been standing in no unhappy reverie , was yet very glad to be called from it , by the now encouraging manner of such a judge , and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse , and only wanted invitation , to give the history of her hopes with great , though trembling delight .-- Emma ' s tremblings as she asked , and as she listened , were better concealed than Harriet ' s , but they were not less .
Mr . Knightley , I shall not allow you to be a fair judge in this case .
It was hardly right ; but it had been so strong an idea , that it would escape her , and his submission to all that she told , was a compliment to her penetration , which made it difficult for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue .
He is as well acquainted with his own claims , as you can be with Harriet ' s .
John loves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection , and Isabella always thinks as he does ; except when he is not quite frightened enough about the children .
I shall sit by you .
They seem not able to do any thing without him .--` Upon my word , Mr . E .,' I often say , ` rather you than I .-- I do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument , if I had half so many applicants .'
What a blessing , that she never had any children !
you are an odd creature !"
` My friend Knightley ' had been so often mentioned , that I was really impatient to see him ; and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his friend .
No , she had had enough of interference .
" I have no doubt of its being our carriage with Miss Bates and Jane .
And it is not merely the house -- the grounds , I assure you , as far as I could observe , are strikingly like .
You may have done wrong with regard to Mr . Dixon , but this is a punishment beyond what you can have merited !-- The kindness and protection of Mrs .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
You are so kind !"
How did Miss Campbell appear to like it ?"
Elton ?"
William Larkins mentioned it here .
This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day ' s visit might not afford , which certainly did not belong to the present half - hour ; but the very sight of Mrs . Weston , her smile , her touch , her voice was grateful to Emma , and she determined to think as little as possible of Mr . Elton ' s oddities , or of any thing else unpleasant , and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost .
Emma was most happy to be called to such a council ; and her father , engaging to think it all over while she was gone , the two young people set off together without delay for the Crown .
She had not been able to speak ; and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome -- then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ; but it was just too late .
I know what thorough justice you will do it , and have scarcely a doubt of its happy effect .-- I think we shall never materially disagree about the writer again ; but I will not delay you by a long preface .-- We are quite well .-- This letter has been the cure of all the little nervousness I have been feeling lately .-- I did not quite like your looks on Tuesday , but it was an ungenial morning ; and though you will never own being affected by weather , I think every body feels a north - east wind .-- I felt for your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning , but had the comfort of hearing last night , by Mr . Perry , that it had not made him ill . " Yours ever , " A . W ."
Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far , if he had not felt persuaded of her not being disinclined to him .
" Pray take care , Mrs . Weston , there is a step at the turning .
Mrs . Bates and Mrs . Elton were together .
" Sir ," said Mr . Woodhouse , rather warmly , " you are very much mistaken if you suppose Mr . Perry to be that sort of character .
His father would not own himself uneasy , and laughed at her fears ; but she could not be cured of wishing that he would part with his black mare .
Isabella turned to Mrs . Weston for her approbation of the plan .
what do you mean ?-- Mistake you !-- Am I to suppose then ?--"
" Oh !
It was the end of an old pencil ,-- the part without any lead .
" Perhaps it is as well ," said Frank Churchill , as he attended Emma to her carriage .
Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better ; but it was impossible to quarrel with words , whose tremulous inequality shewed indisposition so plainly , and she thought only of how she might best counteract this unwillingness to be seen or assisted .
" We should not like her so well as we do , sir , if we could suppose it ; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor ' s advantage ; she knows how very acceptable it must be , at Miss Taylor ' s time of life , to be settled in a home of her own , and how important to her to be secure of a comfortable provision , and therefore cannot allow herself to feel so much pain as pleasure .
What is right to be done cannot be done too soon .
" A very pretty trick you have been playing me , upon my word !
He has a great regard for the Bateses , you know , independent of Jane Fairfax -- and is always glad to shew them attention .
Poor Mr . Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming , and so anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride .-- Could he have seen the heart , he would have cared very little for the lungs ; but without the most distant imagination of the impending evil , without the slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of either , he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news he had received from Mr . Perry , and talked on with much self - contentment , totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him in return .
I have no idea of that sort of thing .
" I do not know what I could imagine , but I confess that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers .
Have you heard from Mrs . John Knightley lately ?
She promised to think of it , and advised him to think of it more ; but he was fully convinced , that no reflection could alter his wishes or his opinion on the subject .
" Yes ," said he , smiling .
He looked at her , as if wanting to read her thoughts .
I have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin .
You would not have been so long in coming , if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury ."
-- Which you know shewed him to be so very .
It will be felt so great an attention !
His letters disgust me ."
The great Mrs . Churchill was no more .
" Such an eye !-- the true hazle eye -- and so brilliant !
Emma seriously hoped she would .
You and Miss Smith , and Miss Fairfax , will be three , and the two Miss Coxes five ; and for five couple there will be plenty of room ."
A man must be very much in love , indeed , to describe her so .
But about the middle of the day she gets hungry , and there is nothing she likes so well as these baked apples , and they are extremely wholesome , for I took the opportunity the other day of asking Mr . Perry ; I happened to meet him in the street .
But if , which I rather imagine , your making the match , as you call it , means only your planning it , your saying to yourself one idle day , ` I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr . Weston were to marry her ,' and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ?
" I am very sure that I never said any thing of either to the other , which both might not have heard ."
She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke , and opening the casement there , immediately called Mr . Knightley ' s attention , and every syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others , as if it had passed within the same apartment .
Well , ( returning to the room ,) I have not been able to succeed .
How delightful !"
Some scruples and some reluctance the widower - father may be supposed to have felt ; but as they were overcome by other considerations , the child was given up to the care and the wealth of the Churchills , and he had only his own comfort to seek , and his own situation to improve as he could .
James could take the note .
I hear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town .
Good morning to you , my dear sir .
" I would rather be talking to you ," he replied ; " but as it seems a matter of justice , it shall be done ."
" You are expecting her again , you say , this morning ?"
" Oh !
" John enters like a brother into my happiness ," continued Mr . Knightley , " but he is no complimenter ; and though I well know him to have , likewise , a most brotherly affection for you , he is so far from making flourishes , that any other young woman might think him rather cool in her praise .
Emma ' s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of what had passed ,-- aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion : but she soon felt that concealment must be impossible .
How well you put it on !-- so gratified !
" And I am quite serious too , I assure you ," replied Mrs . Elton gaily , " in resolving to be always on the watch , and employing my friends to watch also , that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us ."
There is such perfect good - temper and good - will in Mr . Elton as one cannot but value ."
These feelings rapidly restored his comfort , while Mrs . Weston , of a more apprehensive disposition , foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses and delays ; and after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer , suffered a great deal more herself .
I have nothing to do with William ' s wants , but it really is of very great importance that _I_ should see Knightley to - day ; and it becomes a matter , therefore , of very serious inconvenience that I should have had this hot walk to no purpose ."
CHAPTER III
She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait .
" I cannot agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot .
Mrs . Weston ought to have found more in it , for she had a husband whose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing due to her in return for the great goodness of being in love with him ; but though she had one sort of spirit , she had not the best .
Her spirits seemed overcome .
I should like to see Emma in love , and in some doubt of a return ; it would do her good .
But Harriet was in a tremor , and could not touch it ; and Emma , never loth to be first , was obliged to examine it herself .
