" And here is Mrs . Weston and Mr . Frank Churchill too !-- Quite delightful ; so many friends !"
" My dear papa , I sent the whole hind - quarter .
I give you notice that as I find your son , so I shall judge of him .-- I am no flatterer ."
the best nature in the world -- a wedding ."
_You_ do not often overpower me with it ."
He had gone three miles round one day in order to bring her some walnuts , because she had said how fond she was of them , and in every thing else he was so very obliging .
Miss Smith , pray take care .
Oh !
It is a great change ; and though she is amazingly fortunate -- such a situation , I suppose , as no young woman before ever met with on first going out -- do not think us ungrateful , Miss Woodhouse , for such surprising good fortune --( again dispersing her tears )-- but , poor dear soul !
Surry is the garden of England ."
They seem to satisfy every body else ."
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess , who had fallen little short of a mother in affection .
There were Mr . and Mrs . Weston ; delighted to see her and receive her approbation , very busy and very happy in their different way ; she , in some little distress ; and he , finding every thing perfect .
I am losing all my bitterness against spoilt children , my dearest Emma .
I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man : I feel sure that he is not .
She was sensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment from herself ."
I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description .
There I was quite right .
She is always so attentive to them !"
Do not we rather surpass your expectations ?
Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager exclamation .
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ; but Harriet only wanted drawing out , and receiving a few , very few hints .
" It is very natural .
Richard ?-- I saw you the other day as you rode through the town -- Mrs . Otway , I protest !-- and good Mr . Otway , and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline .-- Such a host of friends !-- and Mr . George and Mr .
" And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me ," said Emma , " and a very considerable one -- that I made the match myself .
I know Mr . John Knightley too well -- I am very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body .
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
After some attempts , therefore , to be permitted to begin again , they were obliged to thank Mrs . Weston , look sorrowful , and have done .
" Oh !
He had never been an unhappy man ; his own temper had secured him from that , even in his first marriage ; but his second must shew him how delightful a well - judging and truly amiable woman could be , and must give him the pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen , to excite gratitude than to feel it .
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr . Elton ; and Harriet ' s mind , she had been willing to hope , had been lately gaining strength .
_Her_ connexions may be worse than _his_ .
After this speech he was gone as soon as possible .
Her voice was not unsteady ; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a development of self , such a burst of threatening evil , such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions , must create .-- She listened with much inward suffering , but with great outward patience , to Harriet ' s detail .-- Methodical , or well arranged , or very well delivered , it could not be expected to be ; but it contained , when separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink her spirit -- especially with the corroborating circumstances , which her own memory brought in favour of Mr . Knightley ' s most improved opinion of Harriet .
Mrs . Weston was disappointed .
I have heard him speak , and so must you , so very highly of Jane Fairfax !
" There is so pointed , and so particular a meaning in this compliment ," said she , " that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr . Elton ' s intentions .
She was aware herself , that , parting under any other circumstances , they certainly should have corresponded more , and that her intelligence would not have rested , as it now almost wholly did , on Isabella ' s letters .
" Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr . Elton ' s marrying , Harriet , is the strongest reproach you can make _me_ .
I have taken some pains for your sake , and for Robert Martin ' s sake , ( whom I have always had reason to believe as much in love with her as ever ,) to get acquainted with her .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse ( who , wherever she is , presides ) to say , that she desires to know what you are all thinking of ?"
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
He told Patty this , but bid her not mind it , and be sure not to say any thing to us about it , for Mrs . Hodges _would_ be cross sometimes , and as long as so many sacks were sold , it did not signify who ate the remainder .
Mr . Woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing - room .
May is the very month which Mrs . Churchill is ordered , or has ordered herself , to spend in some warmer place than Enscombe -- in short , to spend in London ; so that we have the agreeable prospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring -- precisely the season of the year which one should have chosen for it : days almost at the longest ; weather genial and pleasant , always inviting one out , and never too hot for exercise .
Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch ; and though he did not say much , his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening .
Two such could never be granted .
Her face was averted from those who had made the attack , and turned towards her aunt .
A fine place , but very retired ."
Frank Churchill caught the name .
That she was not immediately ready , Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power of performance ; and Emma could not but pity such feelings , whatever their origin , and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again .
Oh !
You have been no friend to Harriet Smith , Emma .
" Oh !
Mrs . Smallridge , a most delightful woman !-- A style of living almost equal to Maple Grove -- and as to the children , except the little Sucklings and little Bragges , there are not such elegant sweet children anywhere .
Mrs . Elton then said , " Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do -- but upon such an occasion as this , when every body ' s eyes are so much upon me , and in compliment to the Westons -- who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour -- I would not wish to be inferior to others .
Emma , you are a great dreamer , I think ?"
Elton , before she could be spoken to , was ready ; and before Mr . Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be allowed to hand her into the dining - parlour , was saying --
I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill ; when , provoked by such conduct on my side , such shameful , insolent neglect of her , and such apparent devotion to Miss W ., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense to endure , she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me .-- In short , my dear madam , it was a quarrel blameless on her side , abominable on mine ; and I returned the same evening to Richmond , though I might have staid with you till the next morning , merely because I would be as angry with her as possible .
" Isabella and Emma both write beautifully ," said Mr . Woodhouse ; " and always did .
" But where could _you_ hear it ?"
I should wish it ."
I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , it is very delightful to me , to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove .
A little curiosity Emma had ; and she made the most of it while her friend related .
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
" Ah !
Have you heard from Mrs . John Knightley lately ?
you are too scrupulous , indeed you are ," cried Emma warmly , and taking her hand .
Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless from any real felicity ; it was rather because she felt less happy than she had expected .
He came back gay and self - satisfied , eager and busy , caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse , and defying Miss Smith .
She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr . Elton , and now did full justice to ; and Harriet blushed and smiled , and said she had always thought Mr . Elton very agreeable .
Books of engravings , drawers of medals , cameos , corals , shells , and every other family collection within his cabinets , had been prepared for his old friend , to while away the morning ; and the kindness had perfectly answered .
She is as low as possible .
Oh !
The truth is , Harriet , that my playing is just good enough to be praised , but Jane Fairfax ' s is much beyond it ."
She is known only as parlour - boarder at a common school .
He might be superseded by another ; he certainly would indeed ; nothing could be clearer ; even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient ; but nothing else , she feared , would cure her .
She would be very glad to stay ."
-- And when Mrs . Bates was saying something to Emma , whispered farther , " We do not say a word of any _assistance_ that Perry might have ; not a word of a certain young physician from Windsor .-- Oh !
Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looks and manners have explained themselves ."
Mrs . Stokes ,' said I -- but I had not time for more ."
Dinner - parties and evening - parties were made for him and his lady ; and invitations flowed in so fast that she had soon the pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a disengaged day .
Mrs . Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note , or we should have been .-- But two such offers in one day !-- Never were such neighbours .
Emma , finding her so determined upon neglecting her music , had nothing more to say ; and , after a moment ' s pause , Mrs . Elton chose another subject .
Mrs . Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note , or we should have been .-- But two such offers in one day !-- Never were such neighbours .
It is fit that the fortune should be on his side , for I think the merit will be all on hers ."
It made her animated -- open hearted -- she voluntarily said ;--
It was Garrick ' s , you know ."
" I will say no more about him ," cried Emma , " you turn every thing to evil .
There , it is done .
Now I cannot say , that I think you are any of you looking well at present ."
" I say nothing of which I am ashamed ," replied he , with lively impudence .
` If you must go , my dear ,' said I , ` you must , and I will say you are laid down upon the bed .'"
Well , that is so very !-- I am sure if Jane is tired , you will be so kind as to give her your arm .-- Mr .
as for me , my judgment is worth nothing .
" Mr . Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself ," said she .
Have not I some right to complain ?
The young man ' s conduct , and his sister ' s , seemed the result of real feeling , and she could not but pity them .
There was no want of likeness , she had been fortunate in the attitude , and as she meant to throw in a little improvement to the figure , to give a little more height , and considerably more elegance , she had great confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawing at last , and of its filling its destined place with credit to them both -- a standing memorial of the beauty of one , the skill of the other , and the friendship of both ; with as many other agreeable associations as Mr . Elton ' s very promising attachment was likely to add .
Things must come to a crisis soon now .
