He had seen the coachmen , and they both agreed with him in there being nothing to apprehend .
A sudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her general state , had carried her off after a short struggle .
Oh no !
Now , if your friends have any gratitude , they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return ; but I cannot stay to hear it ."
The stupidest fellow !
By birth she belonged to Highbury : and when at three years old , on losing her mother , she became the property , the charge , the consolation , the fondling of her grandmother and aunt , there had seemed every probability of her being permanently fixed there ; of her being taught only what very limited means could command , and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement , to be engrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person , good understanding , and warm - hearted , well - meaning relations .
He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor ' s merits , without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse ' s character , than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor ' s .
Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech , and saw no alarming symptoms of love .
-- Ford ' s was the principal woollen - draper , linen - draper , and haberdasher ' s shop united ; the shop first in size and fashion in the place .--" And so , there she had set , without an idea of any thing in the world , full ten minutes , perhaps -- when , all of a sudden , who should come in -- to be sure it was so very odd !-- but they always dealt at Ford ' s -- who should come in , but Elizabeth Martin and her brother !-- Dear Miss Woodhouse !
CHAPTER VII
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
This was the amount of the whole story ,-- of his communication and of Harriet ' s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech .-- He dared not stay longer than to see her well ; these several delays left him not another minute to lose ; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety to Mrs . Goddard , and notice of there being such a set of people in the neighbourhood to Mr . Knightley , he set off , with all the grateful blessings that she could utter for her friend and herself .
" Miss Smith !-- oh !-- I had not observed .-- You are extremely obliging -- and if I were not an old married man .-- But my dancing days are over , Mrs . Weston .
CHAPTER XVIII
The quietness of the game made it particularly eligible for Mr . Woodhouse , who had often been distressed by the more animated sort , which Mr . Weston had occasionally introduced , and who now sat happily occupied in lamenting , with tender melancholy , over the departure of the " poor little boys ," or in fondly pointing out , as he took up any stray letter near him , how beautifully Emma had written it .
That young man ( speaking lower ) is very thoughtless .
After this , he made some progress without any pause .
Her many beginnings were displayed .
Even _your_ satisfaction I made sure of .
He had found her agitated and low .-- Frank Churchill was a villain .-- He heard her declare that she had never loved him .
I do not think it could disagree with you ."
It had been serviceable in deadening the first shock , without retaining any influence to alarm .
Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax ' s situation in life .
He went to town on business three days ago , and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send to John .-- He delivered these papers to John , at his chambers , and was asked by him to join their party the same evening to Astley ' s .
She was in gay spirits , and would have prolonged the conversation , wanting to hear the particulars of his suspicions , every look described , and all the wheres and hows of a circumstance which highly entertained her : but his gaiety did not meet hers .
He owed it to her , to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome interference , rather than her welfare ; to encounter any thing , rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause .
There will be a great many people talking at once .
Emma wished he would be less pointed , yet could not help being amused ; and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the remains of a smile , when she saw that with all the deep blush of consciousness , there had been a smile of secret delight , she had less scruple in the amusement , and much less compunction with respect to her .-- This amiable , upright , perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings .
From our relative situation , those attentions were her due , and were felt to be so .-- Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand me before the expiration of that fortnight , I cannot say ;-- when I called to take leave of her , I remember that I was within a moment of confessing the truth , and I then fancied she was not without suspicion ; but I have no doubt of her having since detected me , at least in some degree .-- She may not have surmised the whole , but her quickness must have penetrated a part .
" No , no , you must not ; you shall not , indeed ."
" Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced .
Emma was pleased with the thought ; and producing the box , the table was quickly scattered over with alphabets , which no one seemed so much disposed to employ as their two selves .
" No , no ," said she , " you are quite unreasonable .
Mr . Perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr . Woodhouse ' s life ; and upon being applied to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless taken moderately .
but indeed I would much rather have it only in one .
It would hold the very number for comfort .
Emma could not resist .
Can it be woman ?
There was a great deal of friendly and of compassionate attachment on his side -- but no love .
" And I do envy him , Emma .
" Donwell !"
The very thing that we have always been rather afraid of ; for we should not have liked to have her at such a distance from us , for months together -- not able to come if any thing was to happen .
" This is a pleasure ," said he , in rather a low voice , " coming at least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated .
" I not aware !"
It was to be a whole - length in water - colours , like Mr . John Knightley ' s , and was destined , if she could please herself , to hold a very honourable station over the mantelpiece .
" If he would be so good as to read to them , it would be a kindness indeed !
She was the instigator .
" Yes , yes -- but I am amused that he should have seen so far into my feelings .
" Whenever the time may come , it must be unwelcome to her and all her friends -- but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that is possible -- I mean , as to the character and manners of the family ."
His perception of the striking improvement of Harriet ' s manner , since her introduction at Hartfield , was not one of the least agreeable proofs of his growing attachment .
Emma knew that she had , but would not own it ; and Mr . Elton warmly added ,
Mrs . Weston , your argument weighs most with me .
" My advice ," said Mrs . Weston kindly and persuasively , " I certainly do feel tempted to give .
" Ah !
said she ; ` well , that is quite unexpected .
" Very true , Mr . Weston , perfectly true .
Well , that is so very !-- I am sure if Jane is tired , you will be so kind as to give her your arm .-- Mr .
Had it taken place only once a year , it would have been a grievance .
What has he to do with books ?
She was always quick and assured : Isabella slow and diffident .
That , you know , was so very .
Do let me hear what she says .'"
Let her marry Robert Martin , and she is safe , respectable , and happy for ever ; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly , and teach her to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and large fortune , she may be a parlour - boarder at Mrs . Goddard ' s all the rest of her life -- or , at least , ( for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marry somebody or other ,) till she grow desperate , and is glad to catch at the old writing - master ' s son ."
But I think , my dear , you said you had got it ."
He might be superseded by another ; he certainly would indeed ; nothing could be clearer ; even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient ; but nothing else , she feared , would cure her .
Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr . Knightley till after supper ; but , when they were all in the ballroom again , her eyes invited him irresistibly to come to her and be thanked .
It has been so many years my province to give advice , that you cannot be surprized , Mr . Knightley , at this little remains of office ."
Woman ' s usual occupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they are now ; or with no important variation .
The symptoms were favourable .-- Instead of answering , Harriet turned away confused , and stood thoughtfully by the fire ; and though the letter was still in her hand , it was now mechanically twisted about without regard .
It is on her account that attention to Randalls is doubly due , and she must doubly feel the omission .
The preparing and the going abroad in such weather , with the sacrifice of his children after dinner , were evils , were disagreeables at least , which Mr . John Knightley did not by any means like ; he anticipated nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase ; and the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing his discontent .
I smile because you smile , and shall probably suspect whatever I find you suspect ; but at present I do not see what there is to question .
When they had all talked a little while in harmony of the weather and Mrs . Weston , she found herself abruptly addressed with ,
The unpersuadable point , which he did not mention , Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father .
Much better employed talking to the young ladies .
They seemed more like cheerful , easy friends , than lovers .
" What an amiable creature I was !-- No wonder you should hold my speeches in such affectionate remembrance ."
" You are very kind , but I know what my manners were to you .-- So cold and artificial !-- I had always a part to act .-- It was a life of deceit !-- I know that I must have disgusted you ."
She was too completely overpowered to be immediately able to reply : and two moments of silence being ample encouragement for Mr . Elton ' s sanguine state of mind , he tried to take her hand again , as he joyously exclaimed --
a considerable journey ."
I think it would be much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer , and take their tea with us -- take us in their afternoon walk ; which they might do , as our hours are so reasonable , and yet get home without being out in the damp of the evening .
Do as you please ."
" Will you be so kind ," said she , " when I am missed , as to say that I am gone home ?-- I am going this moment .-- My aunt is not aware how late it is , nor how long we have been absent -- but I am sure we shall be wanted , and I am determined to go directly .-- I have said nothing about it to any body .
Just like her !
Harriet , who had been standing in no unhappy reverie , was yet very glad to be called from it , by the now encouraging manner of such a judge , and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse , and only wanted invitation , to give the history of her hopes with great , though trembling delight .-- Emma ' s tremblings as she asked , and as she listened , were better concealed than Harriet ' s , but they were not less .
Never had she felt so agitated , mortified , grieved , at any circumstance in her life .
Waiving that point , however , and supposing her to be , as you describe her , only pretty and good - natured , let me tell you , that in the degree she possesses them , they are not trivial recommendations to the world in general , for she is , in fact , a beautiful girl , and must be thought so by ninety - nine people out of an hundred ; and till it appears that men are much more philosophic on the subject of beauty than they are generally supposed ; till they do fall in love with well - informed minds instead of handsome faces , a girl , with such loveliness as Harriet , has a certainty of being admired and sought after , of having the power of chusing from among many , consequently a claim to be nice .
A cold stormy rain set in , and nothing of July appeared but in the trees and shrubs , which the wind was despoiling , and the length of the day , which only made such cruel sights the longer visible .
The most satisfactory comparisons were rising in her mind .
" There is no saying , indeed ," replied Harriet rather solemnly .
He turned to Mrs . Weston to implore her assistance , " Would not she give him her support ?-- would not she add her persuasions to his , to induce Miss Woodhouse not to go to Mrs . Goddard ' s till it were certain that Miss Smith ' s disorder had no infection ?
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ; but still they were to part .
In that very room she had been measured last September , with her two friends .
What can it possibly be ?
He had said that Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs . Elton which nobody else paid her .
Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls , communicating all that was immediately important of their state and plans .
When we talked about him , it was as clear as possible ."
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground did her further service , for any thing was welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present .
She went to Mrs . Goddard ' s accordingly the very next day , to undergo the necessary penance of communication ; and a severe one it was .-- She had to destroy all the hopes which she had been so industriously feeding -- to appear in the ungracious character of the one preferred -- and acknowledge herself grossly mistaken and mis - judging in all her ideas on one subject , all her observations , all her convictions , all her prophecies for the last six weeks .
She believed he was looking at her ; probably reflecting on what she had said , and trying to understand the manner .
