Dancing with open windows !-- I am sure , neither your father nor Mrs . Weston ( poor Miss Taylor that was ) would suffer it ."
There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman ' s daughter , and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your own power , or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you ."
On this article I can fully acquit him .
But , as it is , the disappointment is single , and , I trust , will not be lasting .
Let every body on the Hill hear me if they can .
She had hardly been able to speak a word , and every look and action had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness .
With all dear Emma ' s little faults , she is an excellent creature .
I thought it my duty as a friend , and older than yourself , to say thus much to you .
" Oh , Mrs . Churchill ; every body knows Mrs . Churchill ," replied Isabella : " and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without the greatest compassion .
We were just in time ; my mother just ready for us .
" It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to , if Mr . and Mrs . Weston do not .
" Oh !
CHAPTER XVI
She wished he could love a ballroom better , and could like Frank Churchill better .-- He seemed often observing her .
" Thank you for rousing me ," he replied .
I knew you would wish it .
" Oh !
she was going to exclaim ; but she presently found that it was a family of old friends , who were coming , like herself , by particular desire , to help Mr . Weston ' s judgment ; and they were so very closely followed by another carriage of cousins , who had been entreated to come early with the same distinguishing earnestness , on the same errand , that it seemed as if half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatory inspection .
" Yes ; if you and Mr . Woodhouse see no objection , and I trust you cannot , my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter ' s marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
He seemed by this connexion between the families , quite to belong to her .
Emma began to listen better .
yes , quite indispensable ."
He seemed to me very well off as he was .
Do as you please ."
We never heard of such things at Maple Grove ."
Harriet submitted , though her mind could hardly separate the parts , so as to feel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love .
It was quite a chance , he said , that he had not gone round by Randalls .
Mr . Woodhouse told me of it .
But poor Mrs . Bates had a bad cold about a month ago ."
" I shall never be invited to Abbey - Mill again ," was said in rather a sorrowful tone .
here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us ; thank you for the sight of it .
" I have escaped ; and that I should escape , may be a matter of grateful wonder to you and myself .
And she is a good - natured woman after all .
You got Hannah that good place .
I do not know any body who draws so well as you do .
My perpetual influence could not begin earlier , or you would not have been so much out of humour before ."
" Ah !
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr . Elton ; and Harriet ' s mind , she had been willing to hope , had been lately gaining strength .
" Thank you , thank you -- but on no account .-- I would rather walk .-- And for _me_ to be afraid of walking alone !-- I , who may so soon have to guard others !"
If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this trouble for a few hours of noisy entertainment , I have nothing to say against it , but that they shall not chuse pleasures for me .-- Oh !
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr . Martin ' s prose .
To her he looked for comfort ; and her assurances of safety , her representation of the excellence of the horses , and of James , and of their having so many friends about them , revived him a little .
Mr . Woodhouse taken from Hartfield !-- No , he felt that it ought not to be attempted .
He had given it , he could assure her , very long and calm consideration ; he had been walking away from William Larkins the whole morning , to have his thoughts to himself .
He could not be satisfied without a promise -- would not she give him her influence in procuring it ?"
" And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while ; whenever there is any temptation of pleasure ."
Knightley .--" Robert Martin ' s manners have sense , sincerity , and good - humour to recommend them ; and his mind has more true gentility than Harriet Smith could understand ."
" It is very pretty ," said Mr . Woodhouse .
We must remember to let James know that the carriage will be wanted on Tuesday .
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have .
The impossibility of her quitting her father , Mr . Knightley felt as strongly as herself ; but the inadmissibility of any other change , he could not agree to .
They would be married , and settled either at or near Enscombe .
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
He is so very superior .
" We can finish this some other time , you know .
yes , perfectly .-- Why do you make a doubt of it ?"
Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent , and answer in a manner that appropriated nothing .
She shewed it to me .
You will hardly believe me -- but twice in one week he and Mr . Bragge went to London and back again with four horses ."
You and I need not be afraid .
Colonel Campbell rather preferred an olive .
It seemed as if her eyes were suddenly opened , and she were enabled to see that Mr . Elton was not the superior creature she had believed him .
I think her the very worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have .
I hope , with all my heart , the young man may be a Weston in merit , and a Churchill in fortune .-- But Harriet Smith -- I have not half done about Harriet Smith .
The evening is closing in , and grandmama will be looking for us .
I could not bear the idea of it ; so , as soon as Mr . Weston came into the room , and I could get at him , I spoke to him about the carriage .
She was sorry , very sorry .
" Miss Woodhouse -- if you are at leisure -- I have something that I should like to tell you -- a sort of confession to make -- and then , you know , it will be over ."
He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss Smith , or speaking to those who were close to her .-- Emma saw it .
In spite of the answer , therefore , she ordered the carriage , and drove to Mrs . Bates ' s , in the hope that Jane would be induced to join her -- but it would not do ;-- Miss Bates came to the carriage door , all gratitude , and agreeing with her most earnestly in thinking an airing might be of the greatest service -- and every thing that message could do was tried -- but all in vain .
she cried in evident embarrassment , " it all meant nothing ; a mere joke among ourselves ."
" I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him ."
That Emma was his object appeared indisputable .
I have been but half a friend to her ; and if she were _not_ to feel this disappointment so very much , I am sure I have not an idea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her ;-- William Coxe -- Oh !
If the errand were not a pleasure to me , it could be done , as it always is when I am not here , by my grandmama ' s ."
Even _your_ satisfaction I made sure of .
In one respect Mrs . Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first .
I am going to London , to spend a few days with John and Isabella .
Mr . Weston , with triumph of a different sort , was confessing that he had known it to be snowing some time , but had not said a word , lest it should make Mr . Woodhouse uncomfortable , and be an excuse for his hurrying away .
Happily he was not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it .-- Though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged , he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any ; it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons ' understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were proved against them .
He had a great deal to say in return , and very entertainingly ; but Emma ' s feelings were chiefly with Jane , in the argument ; and on leaving Randalls , and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men , she felt , that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill , and really regarding him as she did with friendship , she had never been more sensible of Mr . Knightley ' s high superiority of character .
Weston ?-- Judge between us .
Donwell and Randalls had received their invitation , and none had come for her father and herself ; and Mrs . Weston ' s accounting for it with " I suppose they will not take the liberty with you ; they know you do not dine out ," was not quite sufficient .
Let us forgive each other at once .
I have never seen either Mr . or Mrs . Elton .
Vanity working on a weak head , produces every sort of mischief .
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself , poor Harriet must , in mere charitable caution , be kept at a distance from .
Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago !-- Emma could not but picture it all , and feel how justly they might resent , how naturally Harriet must suffer .
If they are anxious to see you _happily_ married , here is a man whose amiable character gives every assurance of it ;-- if they wish to have you settled in the same country and circle which they have chosen to place you in , here it will be accomplished ; and if their only object is that you should , in the common phrase , be _well_ married , here is the comfortable fortune , the respectable establishment , the rise in the world which must satisfy them ."
He did so , but very soon stopt again to say , " the pianoforte !
They will have their barouche - landau , of course , which holds four perfectly ; and therefore , without saying any thing of _our_ carriage , we should be able to explore the different beauties extremely well .
" Then , my dear Isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home ."
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are .
Harriet had not surmised her own danger , but the idea of it struck her forcibly .
They are good - natured people , and think little of their own claims ; but still they must feel that any body ' s hurrying away is no great compliment ; and Miss Woodhouse ' s doing it would be more thought of than any other person ' s in the room .
He ought to have opposed the first attempt on their side to make him slight his father .
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
In short , I have made a match between Mr . Knightley and Jane Fairfax .
