She believed every body spoke well of him .
He was here only a quarter of an hour , and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even of the time he could stay -- but that there had been misunderstandings he decidedly said .
So began Miss Bates ; and Mr . Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn , for most resolutely and commandingly did he say ,
Your views for Harriet are best known to yourself ; but as you make no secret of your love of match - making , it is fair to suppose that views , and plans , and projects you have ;-- and as a friend I shall just hint to you that if Elton is the man , I think it will be all labour in vain ."
said he directly , ` there is nothing in the way of fruit half so good , and these are the finest - looking home - baked apples I ever saw in my life .'
Mrs . Weston could only approve .
Emma could hardly understand him ; he seemed in an odd humour .
Why should there be any change ?"
-- And in a louder , steadier tone , he concluded with , " He will soon be gone .
To understand , thoroughly understand her own heart , was the first endeavour .
" And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we must conclude it to come from the Campbells ."
You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles , I am sure , sir ; friendly , good sort of people as ever lived , and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years ."
He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal , and came back all the better -- grown quite cool -- and , with good manners , like himself -- able to draw a chair close to them , take an interest in their employment ; and regret , in a reasonable way , that he should be so late .
They vindicated him against the base aspersion .
Mrs . Elton is very good - natured and agreeable , and I dare say her acquaintance are just what they ought to be .
I am always glad to see him .
Pain is no expiation .
She was not sorry .
Harriet was soon back again , and the proposal almost immediately made ; and she had no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnest pressing of both the others .
Jane she had a distinct glimpse of , looking extremely ill ; and , before the door had shut them out , she heard Miss Bates saying , " Well , my dear , I shall _say_ you are laid down upon the bed , and I am sure you are ill enough ."
Some scruples and some reluctance the widower - father may be supposed to have felt ; but as they were overcome by other considerations , the child was given up to the care and the wealth of the Churchills , and he had only his own comfort to seek , and his own situation to improve as he could .
Her caution was thrown away .
Where Miss Taylor failed to stimulate , I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing .-- You never could persuade her to read half so much as you wished .-- You know you could not ."
Mr . Elton , my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can express .
continued Mrs . Elton ; " Knightley himself !-- Was not it lucky ?-- for , not being within when he called the other day , I had never seen him before ; and of course , as so particular a friend of Mr . E .' s , I had a great curiosity .
He should have respected even unreasonable scruples , had there been such ; but hers were all reasonable .
By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury had been delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment .
I rather believe you are giving me more credit for acuteness than I deserve .
There was merit in every drawing -- in the least finished , perhaps the most ; her style was spirited ; but had there been much less , or had there been ten times more , the delight and admiration of her two companions would have been the same .
She would not have been puzzled , had she dared fix on them .
We are so very airy !
What a letter the man writes !"
" Well , I believe , if you will excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , I shall take Emma ' s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
Mr . Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury , and a lively curiosity to see him prevailed , though the compliment was so little returned that he had never been there in his life .
This point was just arranged , when a visitor arrived to tear Emma ' s thoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them , sleeping or waking , the last twenty - four hours -- Mrs . Weston , who had been calling on her daughter - in - law elect , and took Hartfield in her way home , almost as much in duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself , to relate all the particulars of so interesting an interview .
Martin !"
Her person was rather good ; her face not unpretty ; but neither feature , nor air , nor voice , nor manner , were elegant .
I have neglected her too long .
" Ah !
We are both prejudiced ; you against , I for him ; and we have no chance of agreeing till he is really here ."
As to there being any quantity of snow fallen or likely to fall to impede their return , that was a mere joke ; he was afraid they would find no difficulty .
But Mr . Knightley is so very fine a man !"
Harriet ' s cheerful look and manner established hers : she came back , not to think of Mr . Martin , but to talk of Mr . Elton .
I hope not of a putrid infectious sort .
Is not it a good exchange ?-- You consent -- I hope you consent ?"
no , indeed ."
Somebody had placed her , several years back , at Mrs . Goddard ' s school , and somebody had lately raised her from the condition of scholar to that of parlour - boarder .
You have hit upon the very thing to please me ."
" I can never think of it without laughing .-- She hears us , she hears us , Miss Woodhouse .
" I was wrong ," he continued , " in talking of its being _broke_ to you .
" I cannot agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot .
Captain Weston , who had been considered , especially by the Churchills , as making such an amazing match , was proved to have much the worst of the bargain ; for when his wife died , after a three years ' marriage , he was rather a poorer man than at first , and with a child to maintain .
how so ?
His son , too well bred to hear the hint , rose immediately also , saying ,
I should be sorry to be more ."
" I hope Mrs . Bates and Miss Fairfax are --"
Mr . Weston was following ; but Mrs . Elton detained him , to gratify him by her opinion of his son ; and so briskly did she begin , that the young man himself , though by no means moving slowly , could hardly be out of hearing .
Mr . Elton was the only one whose assistance she asked .
This was her history ; and particularly interesting it was to Mr . Woodhouse , who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry , and only regretted that she had not done it .
Upon the whole , she was very persuadable ; and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort -- how certainly Mrs . Goddard , if not Mrs . Bates , might be depended on for bearing him company -- Mr . Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter ' s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spending the whole evening away from him .
Mrs . Weston proposed having no regular supper ; merely sandwiches , & c ., set out in the little room ; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion .
It might be a very indifferent piece of wit , but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it -- and so did Frank and Harriet .-- It did not seem to touch the rest of the party equally ; some looked very stupid about it , and Mr . Knightley gravely said ,
No , we should not have heard , if it had not been for this particular circumstance , of her being to come here so soon .
She loves piquet , you know ; but when she is gone home , I am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself , instead of going to bed at your usual time -- and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort .
If we were obliged to go out such an evening as this , by any call of duty or business , what a hardship we should deem it ;-- and here are we , probably with rather thinner clothing than usual , setting forward voluntarily , without excuse , in defiance of the voice of nature , which tells man , in every thing given to his view or his feelings , to stay at home himself , and keep all under shelter that he can ;-- here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in another man ' s house , with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and heard yesterday , and may not be said and heard again to - morrow .
Miss Bates was obliged to return without success ; Jane was quite unpersuadable ; the mere proposal of going out seemed to make her worse .-- Emma wished she could have seen her , and tried her own powers ; but , almost before she could hint the wish , Miss Bates made it appear that she had promised her niece on no account to let Miss Woodhouse in .
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend -- for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , Jane Fairfax .-- Since her last conversation with Mrs . Weston and Mr . Knightley , she was more conscience - stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been .-- Mr .
" My dear , you are too particular ," said her husband .
What happiness it must be to her good old grandmother and excellent aunt , when she comes to visit them !
William Larkins mentioned it here .
A very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the nature of her agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill .
Her Bath habits made evening - parties perfectly natural to her , and Maple Grove had given her a taste for dinners .
" Yes I should , I am sure I should .
It was being very deficient ."
" Nay , why do you ?"
Harriet said , " very true ," and she " would not think about it ;" but still she talked of it -- still she could talk of nothing else ; and Emma , at last , in order to put the Martins out of her head , was obliged to hurry on the news , which she had meant to give with so much tender caution ; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry , ashamed or only amused , at such a state of mind in poor Harriet -- such a conclusion of Mr . Elton ' s importance with her !
My dear Emma , we must consider this .
I dare say he has ; and though it may cut him off from some advantages , it will secure him many others ."
She went on , however .
Smallridge , too !
" I am very glad I did think of her .
" Your gallantry is really unanswerable .
They were so deserving , that a _little_ higher should have been enough : but as it was , how could she have done otherwise ?-- Impossible !-- She could not repent .
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
Mr . Weston ' s sanguine temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourable exertions ; but Mr . Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it .-- Very true ; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here ."
" How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
Things did not seem -- that is , there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of some .-- So it appeared to me at least , but I might be mistaken .
do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax ' s sensations from you , or from any body else .
to be sure ," cried Emma , " it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
Mrs . Weston begs you to put on your tippet .
They joined company and proceeded together .
You do not mean it ?"
" The carriage !
A man always imagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her ."
" If you are very kind ," said he , " it will be one of the waltzes we danced last night ;-- let me live them over again .
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company , Mr . Knightley , but I am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to Donwell Abbey ."
" I think , Harriet , since your acquaintance with us , you have been repeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen , that you must yourself be struck with the difference in Mr . Martin .
We must do whatever is to be done quickest , and I think our feelings will lose no time there .
And ( raising his voice still more ) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not be mentioned too .
How she could have been so deceived !-- He protested that he had never thought seriously of Harriet -- never !
