That was well done of me ; but there I should have stopped , and left the rest to time and chance .
" Mr . Weston would undoubtedly support me , if he were here , for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject .
My regard for Hartfield is most warm "--
" Never , never !"
" You like it , my Emma , as little as I feared .-- I wish our opinions were the same .
John Knightley came ; but Mr . Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent on the very day .
I am almost afraid that every moment will bring him ."
" I have something to tell you , Emma ; some news ."
Dear Harriet , I give myself joy of this .
He had , in fact , been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence .
I should not wonder if it were to bring on the declaration .
" Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfully employed ," cried Emma .
" I went only to the post - office ," said she , " and reached home before the rain was much .
" It comes to the same thing .
We really must wish you good night ."
but dear Miss Woodhouse , she is now in such retirement , such obscurity , so thrown away .-- Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed with the Campbells are so palpably at an end !
" Poor girl !"
Ah !
She had understood it was to be delayed till Colonel Campbell ' s return ."
I only want to know that Mr . Martin is not very , very bitterly disappointed ."
And now she was very conscious that she ought to have prevented them .-- She felt that she had been risking her friend ' s happiness on most insufficient grounds .
The room at the Crown was to witness it ;-- but it would be better than a common meeting in a crowd .
Mr . Weston was chatty and convivial , and no friend to early separations of any sort ; but at last the drawing - room party did receive an augmentation .
And Mr . Weston tried , in vain , to make them harmonise better .
Oh !
Can it be woman ?
Every possibility of good was before me , and the first of blessings secured , in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence .
" Well , there _is_ feeling here .-- He does seem to have suffered in finding her ill .-- Certainly , I can have no doubt of his being fond of her .
" So scrupulous for others ," he continued , " and yet so careless for herself !
You are afraid of giving me trouble ; but I assure you , my dear Jane , the Campbells can hardly be more interested about you than I am .
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of common concern .
" So very kind !"
Harriet was to sit again the next day ; and Mr . Elton , just as he ought , entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again .
How would he bear to have Miss Bates belonging to him ?-- To have her haunting the Abbey , and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane ?-- ` So very kind and obliging !-- But he always had been such a very kind neighbour !'
Better wait an hour or two , or even half a day for your letters , than run the risk of bringing on your cough again .
They were all disengaged and all happy .-- The preparatory interest of this dinner , however , was not yet over .
I am always glad to see him .
yes -- very -- a very pleasing young woman ."
Weston !-- Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a gentlewoman !
I have taken some pains for your sake , and for Robert Martin ' s sake , ( whom I have always had reason to believe as much in love with her as ever ,) to get acquainted with her .
" Frank was here in February for a fortnight ."
Goldsmith tells us , that when lovely woman stoops to folly , she has nothing to do but to die ; and when she stoops to be disagreeable , it is equally to be recommended as a clearer of ill - fame .
It was no longer in Emma ' s power to superintend his happiness or quicken his measures .
At this moment they were approaching Ford ' s , and he hastily exclaimed , " Ha !
said he , turning his eyes towards Jane .
CHAPTER IV
No , no ; she has qualities which may be trusted ; she will never lead any one really wrong ; she will make no lasting blunder ; where Emma errs once , she is in the right a hundred times ."
Well , and how did Mr . Churchill take it ?"
" Oh !"
Apologies for her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception , and the warmest expressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and Mr . Weston , must necessarily open the cause ; but when these effusions were put by , they had talked a good deal of the present and of the future state of the engagement .
He loved to have the cloth laid , because it had been the fashion of his youth , but his conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to see any thing put on it ; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitors to every thing , his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat .
Let us be discreet -- quite on our good behaviour .-- Hush !-- You remember those lines -- I forget the poem at this moment :
It seemed quite a shame , especially considering how many houses there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away .
The wish of distinguishing her , as far as civility permitted , was very evident , though it could not often proceed beyond a look .
to be sure ," cried Emma , " it is always incomprehensible to a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage .
What is the foolish girl about ?"
Emma turned away her head , divided between tears and smiles .
You must get his consent before you ask mine ."
" Well !
" Dear me !
There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are .
Perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella ' s sister , but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend , without praise and without blindness ; but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into , the want of respectful forbearance towards her father .
She felt that , in quitting Donwell , he must be sacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits ; that in living constantly with her father , and in no house of his own , there would be much , very much , to be borne with .
A better written letter , Harriet ( returning it ,) than I had expected ."
" Well , I cannot understand it ."
" I believe it is very true , my dear , indeed ," said Mr . Woodhouse , with a sigh .
" _He_ is undoubtedly very much in love -- every thing denotes it -- very much in love indeed !-- and when he comes again , if his affection continue , I must be on my guard not to encourage it .-- It would be most inexcusable to do otherwise , as my own mind is quite made up .
He had a very fine flock , and , while she was with them , he had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country .
But Mr . Knightley is so very fine a man !"
there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End .
Mr . Elton , I must beg leave to stop at your house , and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or string , or any thing just to keep my boot on ."
Instances have been known of young people passing many , many months successively , without being at any ball of any description , and no material injury accrue either to body or mind ;-- but when a beginning is made -- when the felicities of rapid motion have once been , though slightly , felt -- it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more .
" And what are we to do for a proper partner for her ?"
I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour .
Papa , do you not think it an excellent improvement ?"
" No , indeed ," cried Emma , most happy to begin , " not in the least .
I should certainly have called at Hartfield , had you failed to come ."
Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove ."
Emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance , and could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of the day , with full confidence in their comfort .
madness , if it is so ; but I hope you are mistaken ."
You make the best of it -- but after you have been a week at Hartfield , you are all of you different creatures ; you do not look like the same .
" I saw you first in February .
Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way through a storm of snow ."
It was adventuring too far , assuming too much , making light of what ought to be serious , a trick of what ought to be simple .
How to understand the deceptions she had been thus practising on herself , and living under !-- The blunders , the blindness of her own head and heart !-- she sat still , she walked about , she tried her own room , she tried the shrubbery -- in every place , every posture , she perceived that she had acted most weakly ; that she had been imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree ; that she had been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying ; that she was wretched , and should probably find this day but the beginning of wretchedness .
said she .
At the same time , I will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint , because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware .
She must see you ."
It is a mere nothing after all ; and not the least draught from the stairs ."
Weston ?-- Judge between us .
I hope you turned directly ."
Depend upon it , he would not like to have his charade slighted , much better than his passion .
The information was , as you state , that he was going to be married to a Miss Hawkins .
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again , and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judging of his general manners , and by inference , of the meaning of his manners towards herself ; of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air ; and of fancying what the observations of all those might be , who were now seeing them together for the first time .
Poor little Emma !
" We shall never agree about him ," cried Emma ; " but that is nothing extraordinary .
It was much easier to chat than to study ; much pleasanter to let her imagination range and work at Harriet ' s fortune , than to be labouring to enlarge her comprehension or exercise it on sober facts ; and the only literary pursuit which engaged Harriet at present , the only mental provision she was making for the evening of life , was the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort that she could meet with , into a thin quarto of hot - pressed paper , made up by her friend , and ornamented with ciphers and trophies .
" Ah !"
Such a woman as Jane Fairfax probably never fell in Mrs . Elton ' s way before -- and no degree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littleness in action , if not in consciousness ."
You do not know how many candidates there always are for the _first_ situations .
