-- thought Emma .--" You have not deserved this .
You do us a great deal of honour to - day , I am sure .
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
who can think of Miss Smith , when Miss Woodhouse is near !
Dear Harriet , I give myself joy of this .
The clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall .
but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand .
And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married , the impression may be a little worn off ."
I thought I had seen you first in February ."
" It was an awkward business , my dear , your spending the autumn at South End instead of coming here .
.
He had been sitting with her , it appeared , most companionably at home , till her usual hour of exercise ; and on being desired to chuse their walk , immediately fixed on Highbury .--" He did not doubt there being very pleasant walks in every direction , but if left to him , he should always chuse the same .
As a counsellor she was not wanted ; but as an approver , ( a much safer character ,) she was truly welcome .
You made a lucky guess ; and _that_ is all that can be said ."
Mr . Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to give the history of it , besides all the history of his own and Isabella ' s coming , and of Emma ' s being to follow , and had indeed just got to the end of his satisfaction that James should come and see his daughter , when the others appeared , and Mrs . Weston , who had been almost wholly engrossed by her attentions to him , was able to turn away and welcome her dear Emma .
I like him very well ."
She was not so materially cast down , however , but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequate restoratives .
Nothing wanting .
Mrs . Weston , I am not to be talked out of my dislike of Harriet Smith , or my dread of its doing them both harm ."
Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence ; and finding that nothing more was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs . Cole ' s , turned to Frank Churchill .
She would be never led into temptation , nor left for it to find her out .
She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at this moment -- _his_ favourite ."
` Not that it was such a very old petticoat either -- for still it would last a great while -- and , indeed , she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong .'"
I know you will soon call on her ; she is living in dread of the visit .
Whenever you are transplanted , like me , Miss Woodhouse , you will understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thing at all like what one has left behind .
On his side were the inquiries ,--" Was she a horsewoman ?-- Pleasant rides ?-- Pleasant walks ?-- Had they a large neighbourhood ?-- Highbury , perhaps , afforded society enough ?-- There were several very pretty houses in and about it .-- Balls -- had they balls ?-- Was it a musical society ?"
When first sounded on the subject , he was so miserable , that they were almost hopeless .-- A second allusion , indeed , gave less pain .-- He began to think it was to be , and that he could not prevent it -- a very promising step of the mind on its way to resignation .
That is too young to settle .
The invitation was refused , and by a verbal message .
Or , perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life .
succeeded in the true English style , burying under a calmness that seemed all but indifference , the real attachment which would have led either of them , if requisite , to do every thing for the good of the other .
A few awkward moments passed , and he sat down again ; and in a more determined manner said ,
Oh !
Her voice was not unsteady ; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a development of self , such a burst of threatening evil , such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions , must create .-- She listened with much inward suffering , but with great outward patience , to Harriet ' s detail .-- Methodical , or well arranged , or very well delivered , it could not be expected to be ; but it contained , when separated from all the feebleness and tautology of the narration , a substance to sink her spirit -- especially with the corroborating circumstances , which her own memory brought in favour of Mr . Knightley ' s most improved opinion of Harriet .
She could not be too soon alarmed , nor send for Perry too often .
" I do not know .
" When I talked of your being altered by time , by the progress of years ," said John Knightley , " I meant to imply the change of situation which time usually brings .
Or Miss Bates ?
By the bye , _that_ is almost enough to put one out of conceit with a niece .
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of common concern .
I hardly know how it has happened ; a little , perhaps , from that wickedness on my side which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was , by her aunt and grandmother , and all their set .
Nobody could nurse her , as we should do ."
-- with many other relative questions , all answered with patient politeness .
He had come , in his anxiety to see how she bore Frank Churchill ' s engagement , with no selfish view , no view at all , but of endeavouring , if she allowed him an opening , to soothe or to counsel her .-- The rest had been the work of the moment , the immediate effect of what he heard , on his feelings .
Maple Grove will probably be my model more than it ought to be -- for we do not at all affect to equal my brother , Mr . Suckling , in income .-- However , my resolution is taken as to noticing Jane Fairfax .-- I shall certainly have her very often at my house , shall introduce her wherever I can , shall have musical parties to draw out her talents , and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation .
Proportions , fore - shortening .-- Oh no !
Mr . Woodhouse hesitated .--" Not near so often , my dear , as I could wish ."
no , my love ; but you will soon be tired .
He was dining with the Randalls family , and Jane , at the Eltons '; and he had seen a look , more than a single look , at Miss Fairfax , which , from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse , seemed somewhat out of place .
" But what are you in doubt of ?
" Mermaids and sharks !
I am here till claimed by Colonel and Mrs .
" Why do you smile ?"
I praised the fair lady too , and altogether sent him away very happy .
Emma demurred .
Exactly so indeed !"
He had a great deal to say in return , and very entertainingly ; but Emma ' s feelings were chiefly with Jane , in the argument ; and on leaving Randalls , and falling naturally into a comparison of the two men , she felt , that pleased as she had been to see Frank Churchill , and really regarding him as she did with friendship , she had never been more sensible of Mr . Knightley ' s high superiority of character .
You will not be sorry to find yourself at home ."
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr . Weston .
You find me trying to be useful ; tell me if you think I shall succeed ."
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
Better be without sense , than misapply it as you do ."
If I had followed her judgment , and subdued my spirits to the level of what she deemed proper , I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have ever known .-- We quarrelled .-- Do you remember the morning spent at Donwell ?-- _There_ every little dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis .
And the more sensibility you betray of their just horrors , the more I shall like you ."
Elton was sitting here , I remember , much about where I am now ."
They were looking over views in Swisserland .
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma , Mr .
His air and voice recovered their usual briskness : he shook her heartily and gratefully by the hand , and entered on the subject in a manner to prove , that he now only wanted time and persuasion to think the engagement no very bad thing .
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , Frank Churchill not too much in love , and Mr . Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her , how very happy a summer must be before her !
But did you never see him ?
Harriet Smith marries Robert Martin ."
" I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time , you had very great amusement in tricking us all .-- I am sure you had .-- I am sure it was a consolation to you ."
How do you do ?-- Very well , I thank you .
but those two lines are "--
They would catch worse colds at the Crown than anywhere ."
Nothing can be more simple , you see .
" Well , I cannot understand it ."
Decidedly , I think , a very gentleman - like man ."
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
Good morning to you , my dear sir .
She felt your full meaning .
You would not think it to look at him , but he is bilious -- Mr . Cole is very bilious .
Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance .
She was ready to tell every thing in her power , but on this subject questions were vain .
" He had never seen so lovely a face , and was delighted with her naivete ."
She had hoped for an answer here -- for a few words to say that her conduct was at least intelligible ; but he was silent ; and , as far as she could judge , deep in thought .
She meant to take her in the carriage , leave her at the Abbey Mill , while she drove a little farther , and call for her again so soon , as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past , and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for the future .
Kitty , a fair but frozen maid , Kindled a flame I yet deplore , The hood - wink ' d boy I called to aid , Though of his near approach afraid , So fatal to my suit before .
It is a retired place .
I am very much afraid that it will all end in nothing .
So sudden !-- You may guess , dear Miss Woodhouse , what a flurry it has thrown me in !
I would rather not be tempted .
At this moment Mr . Weston appeared at a little distance from the window , evidently on the watch .
My dear Emma , I am longing to talk to you .
Emma would be " very happy to wait on Mrs . Bates , & c .," and they did at last move out of the shop , with no farther delay from Miss Bates than ,
Selina has entirely given up music -- never touches the instrument -- though she played sweetly .
" Our poor ball must be quite given up ."
I consider one as including the other .
" I have the greatest pleasure , my dear Emma , in forwarding to you the enclosed .
" I think she must be here soon ," said he .
