I hardly ever get a letter ."
Besides the Eltons , it must be the Westons and Mr . Knightley ; so far it was all of course -- and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth :-- but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction , and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet ' s begging to be allowed to decline it .
It is a great deal more natural than one could wish , that a young man , brought up by those who are proud , luxurious , and selfish , should be proud , luxurious , and selfish too .
The list she drew up when only fourteen -- I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit , that I preserved it some time ; and I dare say she may have made out a very good list now .
The unpersuadable point , which he did not mention , Emma guessed to be good behaviour to his father .
_She_ was a little occupied in weighing her own feelings , and trying to understand the degree of her agitation , which she rather thought was considerable .
Knightley .-- Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place , on her must rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning ; for his attachment , she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness of Harriet ' s ;-- and even were this not the case , he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly .
Receive it on my judgment .
" Oh !
This was too true for contradiction .
What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream !
I know we agreed never to name him -- but considering how infinitely superior he is to every body else , I should not have thought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other person .
If I had not promoted Mr . Weston ' s visits here , and given many little encouragements , and smoothed many little matters , it might not have come to any thing after all .
I was ready to have gone with her , but this will do just as well .
Isabella does not seem more my sister ; has never excited a greater interest ; perhaps hardly so great .
But a farmer can need none of my help , and is , therefore , in one sense , as much above my notice as in every other he is below it ."
And , my dear , whenever he comes , you had better let him look at little Bella ' s throat ."
He knew of no one but Mrs . Goddard to whom he could apply for information of her relations or friends .
The like reserve prevailed on other topics .
He came to ask me whether I thought it would be imprudent in him to settle so early ; whether I thought her too young : in short , whether I approved his choice altogether ; having some apprehension perhaps of her being considered ( especially since _your_ making so much of her ) as in a line of society above him .
Never had the exquisite sight , smell , sensation of nature , tranquil , warm , and brilliant after a storm , been more attractive to her .
" Oh !
Who had been at pains to give Harriet notions of self - consequence but herself ?-- Who but herself had taught her , that she was to elevate herself if possible , and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment ?-- If Harriet , from being humble , were grown vain , it was her doing too .
The Coles were very respectable in their way , but they ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them .
Harriet was too much agitated to encounter him .
Thank you , we do indeed .
" Harriet , I will only venture to declare , that Mr . Knightley is the last man in the world , who would intentionally give any woman the idea of his feeling for her more than he really does ."
I think you will agree with me , ( turning with a soft air to Emma ,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation , though Mr . Knightley perhaps , from being used to the large parties of London , may not quite enter into our feelings ."
" Emma !"
The most unaccountable business !
this must be the very shop that every body attends every day of their lives , as my father informs me .
" When Miss Smiths and Mr . Eltons get acquainted -- they do indeed -- and really it is strange ; it is out of the common course that what is so evidently , so palpably desirable -- what courts the pre - arrangement of other people , should so immediately shape itself into the proper form .
It is only by seeing women in their own homes , among their own set , just as they always are , that you can form any just judgment .
People of the name of Tupman , very lately settled there , and encumbered with many low connexions , but giving themselves immense airs , and expecting to be on a footing with the old established families .
It was enough for her to feel .
" Thank you .
" Oh !
My mother is so delighted !-- for she is to be three months with us at least .
This will certainly be the beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma , Mr .
It is like a woman ' s writing ."
" Aye , very true .-- I wish I could recollect more of it .
CHAPTER XVII
replied the happily deceived aunt , while eagerly hunting for the letter .--" Oh !
How could you be so unfeeling to Miss Bates ?
I should have made a good likeness of her , if she would have sat longer , but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four children that she would not be quiet .
It was through a series of strange blunders !"
I do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness .
It is his own idea .
Elton ?"
" I think she must be here soon ," said he .
I could not have believed it !
I could have wished , however , as you know , that you had seen Mr . Wingfield before you left home ."
We must go in the carriage , to be sure ."
" My friend Mr . Perry !
" On the misery of what she had suffered , during the concealment of so many months ," continued Mrs . Weston , " she was energetic .
He seems perfectly unprepared for that ."
I shall write to Mrs . Partridge in a day or two , and shall give her a strict charge to be on the look - out for any thing eligible ."
--
Every body is so surprized ; and every body says the same obliging things .
" How I could so long a time be fancying myself !
" It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given to Hartfield .
Jane Fairfax was very elegant , remarkably elegant ; and she had herself the highest value for elegance .
I am perfectly comfortable to - day ."
She would not stir a step , nor drop a hint .
You are my best cure ."
An unpretending , single - minded , artless girl -- infinitely to be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs . Elton .
The decree is issued by somebody .
-- said Emma , still perplexed .
She would keep the peace if possible ; and there was something honourable and valuable in the strong domestic habits , the all - sufficiency of home to himself , whence resulted her brother ' s disposition to look down on the common rate of social intercourse , and those to whom it was important .-- It had a high claim to forbearance .
His professions and his proposals did him no service .
It could be protracted no longer .
" Myself creating what I saw ,"
" And , upon my word , they have an air of great probability .
CHAPTER VIII
Another slice of cold meat , another draught of Madeira and water , will make you nearly on a par with the rest of us ."
Yes , indeed , there is every thing in the world that can make her happy in it .
" You could not have visited me !"
Her character appeared absolutely changed .
are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr .
The weather added what it could of gloom .
Soft is the very word for her eye -- of all epithets , the justest that could be given .
Selina has entirely given up music -- never touches the instrument -- though she played sweetly .
thought Emma , " he would have done as much for Harriet ."
These days of confinement would have been , but for her private perplexities , remarkably comfortable , as such seclusion exactly suited her brother , whose feelings must always be of great importance to his companions ; and he had , besides , so thoroughly cleared off his ill - humour at Randalls , that his amiableness never failed him during the rest of his stay at Hartfield .
What do you imagine his age to be ?"
Dear Miss Woodhouse , how could you so mistake me ?"
We are very proud of the children , are not we , papa ?
May was better for every thing than February .
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury , and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells .-- The Mr . Churchills were also in town ; and they were only waiting for November .
He was not calm ; his spirits were evidently fluttered ; there was restlessness about him .
The same civilities and courtesies , the same success and satisfaction , took place on the morrow , and accompanied the whole progress of the picture , which was rapid and happy .
" Yes , papa , it is written out in our second page .
there he is .
This is a matter of mere common politeness and good - breeding , and has nothing to do with any encouragement to people to marry ."
But the expression is hardly admissible , Mrs . Weston , is it ?
Emma recollected , blushed , was sorry , but tried to laugh it off .
CHAPTER III
" I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn , instead of coming here ."
When I am quite determined as to the time , I am not at all afraid of being long unemployed .
Mr . and Mrs . Elton , indeed , shewed no unwillingness to mix , and be as agreeable as they could ; but during the two whole hours that were spent on the hill , there seemed a principle of separation , between the other parties , too strong for any fine prospects , or any cold collation , or any cheerful Mr . Weston , to remove .
