She seems quite recovered now .
It was no more than the principals were prepared for ; they had calculated from the time of its being known at Randalls , how soon it would be over Highbury ; and were thinking of themselves , as the evening wonder in many a family circle , with great sagacity .
Emma thought with pleasure of some change of subject .
I always say this is quite one of the evils of matrimony ."
Frank Churchill sang again .
He seems every thing the fondest parent could .
What is before me , I see .
" With a great deal of pleasure , sir , at any time ," said Mr . Knightley , laughing , " and I agree with you entirely , that it will be a much better thing .
The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had been imagined , but he was at Highbury very soon afterwards .
Any thing else I should be most happy to do , at your command -- but my dancing days are over ."
I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions , though you make so noble a profession of doing it , but I honestly tell you what they are ."
A very gracious invitation was returned , and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion .
Quite a humourist .
It seemed to him a very ill - judged measure ."
" It is as well , perhaps , that I have not had the possibility .
If she can hesitate as to ` Yes ,' she ought to say ` No ' directly .
" I am not at all surprized at you , Harriet .
One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably by surprize -- a second , slightly but correctly taken by Frank Churchill .
Without knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane , or when it stopped , they found themselves , all at once , at the door of his house ; and he was out before another syllable passed .-- Emma then felt it indispensable to wish him a good night .
She would have given a great deal , or endured a great deal , to have had the Martins in a higher rank of life .
Tea was carrying round , and Mr . Weston , having said all that he wanted , soon took the opportunity of walking away .
" Cautious , very cautious ," thought Emma ; " he advances inch by inch , and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure ."
And yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good - will .
" I would not go away without seeing you , but I have no time to spare , and therefore must now be gone directly .
` It is only Mrs . Cole ,' said I , ` depend upon it .
said he , ` I do think I can fasten the rivet ; I like a job of this kind excessively .'
But take care of yourself .
poor Harriet !"
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend -- for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , Jane Fairfax .-- Since her last conversation with Mrs . Weston and Mr . Knightley , she was more conscience - stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been .-- Mr .
" That will never be , however , I can assure you .
Colonel Campbell , you know , is quite our angel .
We had had a great deal of trouble in persuading him to sit at all .
My father depends on it .
said Emma , as soon as she could speak .
But I shall always think it a very abominable sort of proceeding .
She asked no more questions therefore , merely employed her own fancy , and that soon pointed out to her the probability of its being some money concern -- something just come to light , of a disagreeable nature in the circumstances of the family ,-- something which the late event at Richmond had brought forward .
" My advice ," said Mrs . Weston kindly and persuasively , " I certainly do feel tempted to give .
I give you this caution now , because I shall never speak to you again on the subject .
Emma only nodded , and smiled .-- After a little thinking , and a very tender sigh , he added ,
Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment , and every body had a burst of admiration on first arriving ; but in the general amount of the day there was deficiency .
There must be ample room in it for every real comfort .
As she sat one morning , looking forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note was brought from Mrs . Goddard , requesting , in most respectful terms , to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her ; a most welcome request : for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen , whom Emma knew very well by sight , and had long felt an interest in , on account of her beauty .
I must love him ; and now that I am satisfied on one point , the one material point , I am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well , and ready to hope that it may .
" I was with Mr . Cole on business an hour and a half ago .
Upon my word it is enough to put one in a fright .
when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece of court - plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about !
" Well !
" They told me something ," said Harriet rather hesitatingly ;" but it is nothing of any consequence ."
I am not one of those who have witty things at every body ' s service .
Depend upon it , he would not like to have his charade slighted , much better than his passion .
I should like to know how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your being of the party ; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure to attend to the little boys .
It will be bad enough for the horses ."
But with all the hopes of cheerfulness , and all the present comfort of delay , there was still such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet , as made it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease .
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
She read it to him , just as he liked to have any thing read , slowly and distinctly , and two or three times over , with explanations of every part as she proceeded -- and he was very much pleased , and , as she had foreseen , especially struck with the complimentary conclusion .
It is his companion all this evening , his solace , his delight .
What a pity it is that Mr . Weston ever thought of her !"
" I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time , you had very great amusement in tricking us all .-- I am sure you had .-- I am sure it was a consolation to you ."
Mr . Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity .
said Mr . Woodhouse , shaking his head and fixing his eyes on her with tender concern .-- The ejaculation in Emma ' s ear expressed , " Ah !
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty - spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
Emma could not suppose any such thing , knowing as she did , that both the Mr . Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself ;-- and two basins only were ordered .
We must not be nice and ask for all the virtues into the bargain .
But hush , hush !"
I wish I were anywhere else ."
They have no mercy on her ."
I have the pleasure , madam , ( to Mrs . Bates ,) of restoring your spectacles , healed for the present ."
And woman , lovely woman , reigns alone .
My charge would be much more concise than her ' s , and probably not much in the same spirit ; all that I have to recommend being comprised in , do not spoil them , and do not physic them ."
The present crisis , indeed , seemed to be brought on by them ; and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety of his conduct ."
Whenever she is with us , Mrs . Cole does not know how to shew her kindness enough ; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much as any body can .
She must see more of him to understand his ways ; at present she only felt they were agreeable .
Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a little deaf .
Weston ."
So I said , I was very much obliged to him : you know I could not do less ; and then he went back to Elizabeth , and I came round by the stables -- I believe I did -- but I hardly knew where I was , or any thing about it .
" Was he agreeable ?"
We have apple - dumplings , however , very often .
Do as you please ."
The appearance of the little sitting - room as they entered , was tranquillity itself ; Mrs . Bates , deprived of her usual employment , slumbering on one side of the fire , Frank Churchill , at a table near her , most deedily occupied about her spectacles , and Jane Fairfax , standing with her back to them , intent on her pianoforte .
I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had been of some use ; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may .
I wanted to keep it from Jane ' s knowledge ; but , unluckily , I had mentioned it before I was aware ."
" My dear Jane , say no more about it .
But here is my father coming : you will not object to my reading the charade to him .
That very dear part of Emma , her fancy , received an amusing supply .
It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement .
These amazing engagements of mine -- what have they been ?
" My dear , you are too particular ," said her husband .
Emma was extremely glad to see him -- but there was a degree of confusion -- a number of embarrassing recollections on each side .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse ( who , wherever she is , presides ) to say , that she desires to know what you are all thinking of ?"
When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with , of her excellence and patience , and my uncle ' s generosity , I am mad with joy : but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her , and how little I deserve to be forgiven , I am mad with anger .
She was to convey Harriet , and they drove to the Crown in good time , the Randalls party just sufficiently before them .
The heat overcame me ."
She thought so well of the letter , that when Mr . Knightley came again , she desired him to read it .
Patty makes an excellent apple - dumpling .
It was her own choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury ; to spend , perhaps , her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear : and the Campbells , whatever might be their motive or motives , whether single , or double , or treble , gave the arrangement their ready sanction , and said , that they depended more on a few months spent in her native air , for the recovery of her health , than on any thing else .
" Where is the young man ?"
She could see nothing but evil in it .
But ( lowering her voice )-- nobody speaks except ourselves , and it is rather too much to be talking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people ."
" My dear , dear anxious friend ,"-- said she , in mental soliloquy , while walking downstairs from her own room , " always overcareful for every body ' s comfort but your own ; I see you now in all your little fidgets , going again and again into his room , to be sure that all is right ."
He thought principally of Mrs . Churchill ' s illness , and wanted to know how she was treated ; and as for the ball , it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed ; but they would all be safer at home .
