He was a married man , with only one living child , a girl , about Jane ' s age : and Jane became their guest , paying them long visits and growing a favourite with all ; and before she was nine years old , his daughter ' s great fondness for her , and his own wish of being a real friend , united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking the whole charge of her education .
He paused .
I never heard of such a thing .
South End is prohibited , if you please .
" The shame ," he answered , " is all mine , or ought to be .
Have you heard from Mrs . John Knightley lately ?
Nobody , who has not been in the interior of a family , can say what the difficulties of any individual of that family may be .
However , this does make a difference ; and , perhaps , when we come to talk it over -- but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration .
I should be surprized if , after seeing them , you could be in company with Mr . Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before .
Mr . Elton looked all happiness at this proposition ; and nothing could exceed his alertness and attention in conducting them into his house and endeavouring to make every thing appear to advantage .
" My friend Mr . Perry !
Emma , your infatuation about that girl blinds you .
So I said , I was very much obliged to him : you know I could not do less ; and then he went back to Elizabeth , and I came round by the stables -- I believe I did -- but I hardly knew where I was , or any thing about it .
You never wrote a truer line ."
I was reading it to Mrs . Cole , and since she went away , I was reading it again to my mother , for it is such a pleasure to her -- a letter from Jane -- that she can never hear it often enough ; so I knew it could not be far off , and here it is , only just under my huswife -- and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says ;-- but , first of all , I really must , in justice to Jane , apologise for her writing so short a letter -- only two pages you see -- hardly two -- and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half .
I had no right to expect much , and I did not expect much ; but I had no idea that he could be so very clownish , so totally without air .
" That will never be , however , I can assure you .
Do you suppose she does not often say all this to herself ?
" It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world ."
The post - office has a great charm at one period of our lives .
" I think her all you describe .
Serle understands boiling an egg better than any body .
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since those two decisive dances .-- Emma knew that he had , on that occasion , found her much superior to his expectation .
She is always so attentive to them !"
But colds were never so prevalent as they have been this autumn .
I am sure you did not much expect to like us .
Emma was quite relieved , and could presently say , with a little more composure ,
Can you think your friend behindhand in these sort of considerations ?
" Do you dare say this ?"
( looking round with the most good - humoured dependence on every body ' s assent )-- Do not you all think I shall ?"
" And Mrs . Perry and the children , how are they ?
Mr . Knightley was to dine with them -- rather against the inclination of Mr . Woodhouse , who did not like that any one should share with him in Isabella ' s first day .
He was wishing to get the better of his attachment to herself , she just recovering from her mania for Mr . Elton .
She had had three weeks of happy exemption from Mr . Elton ; and Harriet ' s mind , she had been willing to hope , had been lately gaining strength .
It is not that I am without the wish ; but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should put - to for such a purpose ."
" He is very obliging ," said Emma ; " but is he sure that Harriet means to marry him ?"
It was almost enough to make her think of marrying .
Good old Mrs . Bates -- I will call upon her to - morrow , and take my children .-- They are always so pleased to see my children .-- And that excellent Miss Bates !-- such thorough worthy people !-- How are they , sir ?"
" I see no probability in it , unless you have any better foundation than what you mention .
" Yes -- it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill - humour of Mrs . Churchill , which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world ."
The difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never .
She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration .
such delicacy !-- and yet without being actually fair .-- One cannot call her fair .
I am sure they will like her extremely ; and when she gets a little acquainted with them , her fears will completely wear off , for there really is nothing in the manners of either but what is highly conciliating .-- I shall have her very often indeed while they are with me , and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her in the barouche - landau in some of our exploring parties ."
She had not been able to speak ; and , on entering the carriage , sunk back for a moment overcome -- then reproaching herself for having taken no leave , making no acknowledgment , parting in apparent sullenness , she looked out with voice and hand eager to shew a difference ; but it was just too late .
Weston !-- Astonished that the person who had brought me up should be a gentlewoman !
" I perfectly agree with you , sir ,"-- was then his remark .
" So early in life -- at three - and - twenty -- a period when , if a man chuses a wife , he generally chuses ill . At three - and - twenty to have drawn such a prize !
" Let me entreat you ," cried Mr . Elton ; " it would indeed be a delight !
" I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son to you ," said Mr . Weston .
You got Hannah that good place .
They will read together .
You are trying not to smile ."
She had no sense of superiority then .
Mr . Perry was an intelligent , gentlemanlike man , whose frequent visits were one of the comforts of Mr . Woodhouse ' s life ; and upon being applied to , he could not but acknowledge ( though it seemed rather against the bias of inclination ) that wedding - cake might certainly disagree with many -- perhaps with most people , unless taken moderately .
I wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings .
Emma listened , and then coolly said , " I shall not be satisfied , unless he comes ."
Emma was extremely gratified .-- They were interrupted by the bustle of Mr . Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again .
" And do you see her , sir , tolerably often ?"
Little things do not irritate him .
I shall not be far off , if you want me ."
" Are you well , my Emma ?"
She promised , however , to think of it ; and pretty nearly promised , moreover , to think of it , with the intention of finding it a very good scheme .
He thanked her , observing , " How lucky that we should arrive at the same moment !
She would not have been puzzled , had she dared fix on them .
I consider one as including the other .
" I am very much obliged to you ," said Emma , laughing again .
Neither wine nor conversation was any thing to him ; and gladly did he move to those with whom he was always comfortable .
It was made a great favour of ; and altogether it was more than I could bear ; and so I never would finish it , to have it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness , to every morning visitor in Brunswick Square ;-- and , as I said , I did then forswear ever drawing any body again .
" What is the matter , sir ?-- Did you speak to me ?"
You are his object -- and you will soon receive the completest proof of it .
The unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been a little put aside by Elizabeth Martin ' s calling at Mrs . Goddard ' s a few days afterwards .
Having arranged all these matters , looked them through , and put them all to rights , she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up for the demands of the two little boys , as well as of their grandpapa , when the great iron sweep - gate opened , and two persons entered whom she had never less expected to see together -- Frank Churchill , with Harriet leaning on his arm -- actually Harriet !-- A moment sufficed to convince her that something extraordinary had happened .
We were just in time ; my mother just ready for us .
He thought we walked towards Randalls most days .
But what did such particulars explain ?-- The fact was , as Emma could now acknowledge , that Harriet had always liked Robert Martin ; and that his continuing to love her had been irresistible .-- Beyond this , it must ever be unintelligible to Emma .
" Indeed !-- that must be a very great pleasure ."
But poor Mrs . Bates had a bad cold about a month ago ."
regular features , open countenance , with a complexion !
She would not have been puzzled , had she dared fix on them .
In respectability of character , there can be no doubt that they are .
No intercourse with Harriet possible but by note ; no church for her on Sunday any more than on Christmas Day ; and no need to find excuses for Mr . Elton ' s absenting himself .
Mr . Elton knows you ."
Good Heavens !-- What can be to be _broke_ to me , that does not relate to one of that family ?"
It was accepted ; and from that period Jane had belonged to Colonel Campbell ' s family , and had lived with them entirely , only visiting her grandmother from time to time .
" If I know myself , Harriet , mine is an active , busy mind , with a great many independent resources ; and I do not perceive why I should be more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one - and - twenty .
I was late ; I met her walking home by herself , and wanted to walk with her , but she would not suffer it .
And how much may be said in her situation for even that error !"
Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , from having been longer than usual absent from Surry , were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest .
But that would not do .
" I see how it is ," said she .
You and I shall not want opportunities .
" It is very natural .
Mrs . Weston said no more ; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and mortification she must be returning to her seat .
I give you credit for it .
CHAPTER XI
It had not been forgotten before , but it had been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day .
that ' s a great pity ; for I assure you , Miss Woodhouse , where the waters do agree , it is quite wonderful the relief they give .
It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement .
" Well , well , means to make her an offer then .
