It was not in compliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent , or so indignant ; he was not guided by _her_ feelings in reprobating the ball , for _she_ enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree .
Nobody is healthy in London , nobody can be .
and his wife ' s persuading him to it , out of care for his health -- just what will happen , I have no doubt , some time or other ; only a little premature .
"-- Mrs . Weston , I suppose ," interrupted Mrs . Elton , rather mortified .
" One can suppose nothing else ," added Mrs . Cole , " and I was only surprized that there could ever have been a doubt .
" My dear papa , he is three - and - twenty .
" But you have not seen so much of the world as I have .
In a moment he went on --
do you recommend this side ?-- Well , I am sure , Mr . Churchill -- only it seems too good -- but just as you please .
She was evidently displeased ; looked up , and seeing herself watched , blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her , and saying only , " I did not know that proper names were allowed ," pushed away the letters with even an angry spirit , and looked resolved to be engaged by no other word that could be offered .
With him it was most unnatural .
What a blessing , that she never had any children !
Do not you remember what Mr . Perry said , so many years ago , when I had the measles ?
I should not like a man who is so soon discomposed by a hot morning .
" What does all that signify ?
say beautiful rather .
I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you .
Mr . Woodhouse came in , and very soon led to the subject again , by the recurrence of his very frequent inquiry of " Well , my dears , how does your book go on ?-- Have you got any thing fresh ?"
To speak , she was sure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness .
" Oh !
Such a heart -- such a Harriet !
" Well -- if you advise it .-- But ( with a smile ) if Colonel Campbell should have employed a careless friend , and if it should prove to have an indifferent tone -- what shall I say ?
Mrs . Elton seemed most favourably impressed by the size of the room , the entrance , and all that she could see or imagine .
Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and flowers ; and has not Mrs . Weston some inimitable figure - pieces in her drawing - room , at Randalls ?"
I have heard so much in praise of Mr . Frank Churchill .-- At the same time it is fair to observe , that I am one of those who always judge for themselves , and are by no means implicitly guided by others .
` Have you , upon your honour ?'
Or , perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself to be qualified for a country life .
" Not at all ," cried he ; " I am much obliged to you for it .
Ah !
" I was only going to observe , that though such unfortunate circumstances do sometimes occur both to men and women , I cannot imagine them to be very frequent .
" Mrs . Cole has servants to send .
That was your name for him , was it ?"
She would be placed in the midst of those who loved her , and who had better sense than herself ; retired enough for safety , and occupied enough for cheerfulness .
I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else ; but you need not be afraid , they are very small , you see -- one of our small eggs will not hurt you .
" My mother ' s deafness is very trifling you see -- just nothing at all .
I believe you were glad we danced no longer ; but I would have given worlds -- all the worlds one ever has to give -- for another half - hour ."
The cold repast was over , and the party were to go out once more to see what had not yet been seen , the old Abbey fish - ponds ; perhaps get as far as the clover , which was to be begun cutting on the morrow , or , at any rate , have the pleasure of being hot , and growing cool again .-- Mr .
The idea of Mr . Elton was certainly cheering ; but still , after a time , she was tender - hearted again towards the rejected Mr . Martin .
Emma watched the entree of her own particular little friend ; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace , she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner , but could most heartily rejoice in that light , cheerful , unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure , in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection .
I am always well , you know .
It must be all conjecture ."
To be in company , nicely dressed herself and seeing others nicely dressed , to sit and smile and look pretty , and say nothing , was enough for the happiness of the present hour .
After waiting a moment , as if to be sure she intended to say no more , he replied ,
" My dear madam !
The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency .
" She thinks herself wrong , then , for having consented to a private engagement ?"
" And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking ?"
In her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her .
Where is she ?-- Oh !
" I do not know whether it ought to be so , but certainly silly things do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way .
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with spirit .
dear , Kingston -- are you ?-- Mrs .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
Every distinguishing attention that could be paid , was paid to her .
So she thought at first ;-- but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need not be put off .
But Harriet rejected the suspicion with spirit .
I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr . Frank Churchill , who is like nobody by his side .
And then , to prevent farther outrage and indignation , changed the subject directly .
He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing ; and Emma was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills .
You will not like the noise ."
I doubt it .
It is what we happily have never known any thing of ; but it must be a life of misery .
She could not respect his eye , but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable .
I really must talk to him about purchasing a donkey .
No objection was raised on the father ' s side ; the young man was treated liberally ; it was all as it should be : and as Emma became acquainted with Robert Martin , who was now introduced at Hartfield , she fully acknowledged in him all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for her little friend .
The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits , but principally of those of the elder , whose temper was by much the most communicative , and who was always the greater talker .
But she was not at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the other day .-- Shocking plan , living together .
" None ; not one .
Where shall we see a better daughter , or a kinder sister , or a truer friend ?
Miss Woodhouse , believe me I have not the presumption to suppose -- Indeed I am not so mad .-- But it is a pleasure to me to admire him at a distance -- and to think of his infinite superiority to all the rest of the world , with the gratitude , wonder , and veneration , which are so proper , in me especially ."
Mr . Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas -- though you know it is longer since they were with him , than with us ."
What nonsense one talks , Miss Woodhouse , when hard at work , if one talks at all ;-- your real workmen , I suppose , hold their tongues ; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word -- Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing .
If there had not been so much anger , there would have been desperate awkwardness ; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment .
" No , my dear , I never encouraged any body to marry , but I would always wish to pay every proper attention to a lady -- and a bride , especially , is never to be neglected .
Harriet ' s cheerful look and manner established hers : she came back , not to think of Mr . Martin , but to talk of Mr . Elton .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
" But it is proved by the smallness of the school , which I have heard you speak of , as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs . Bragge ; the only school , and not more than five - and - twenty children ."
cried Miss Bates .
The difference in that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make the whole difference of seeing him always and seeing him never .
Of the lady , individually , Emma thought very little .
She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing .
We really are so shocked !
I hope you turned directly ."
It was growing late , and Miss Bates became anxious to get home , on her mother ' s account .
" What two letters !-- express perfection !
" Donwell !"
She had previously determined how far she would proceed , on any application of the sort ; and it would be safer for both , to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with speed .-- She was decided , and thus spoke --
" Oh yes , sir ," cried she with ready sympathy , " how you must miss her !
" Nay , dear Emma , now I must take his part ; for though he has been wrong in this instance , I have known him long enough to answer for his having many , very many , good qualities ; and --"
I knew you would wish it .
" Has your son been with you , then ?"
Very thoughtful of Colonel Campbell , was not it ?-- He knew Miss Fairfax could have no music here .
I am a great advocate for timidity -- and I am sure one does not often meet with it .-- But in those who are at all inferior , it is extremely prepossessing .
I do not know who would ever look at him in the company of the other .
Can I do any thing for _you_ ?"
I am always watching her to admire ; and I do pity her from my heart ."
" I thought he meant to try his skill , by his manner of declining it yesterday ."
" Oh !
There she is -- no , that ' s somebody else .
Good Heavens !-- What can be to be _broke_ to me , that does not relate to one of that family ?"
