He gave me a quiet hint ; I told him he was mistaken ; he asked my pardon and said no more .
The longer she considered it , the greater was her sense of its expediency .
He could not meet her in conversation , rational or playful .
" I have often thought them the worst of the two ," replied he coolly .
.
The wants and sufferings of the poor family , however , were the first subject on meeting .
Harriet listened , and Emma drew in peace .
The weather added what it could of gloom .
Pray do not let them talk of it .
Give me the book , I will write it down , and then there can be no possible reflection on you ."
It appears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature .
There is to be no form or parade -- a sort of gipsy party .
Why should he marry ?-- He is as happy as possible by himself ; with his farm , and his sheep , and his library , and all the parish to manage ; and he is extremely fond of his brother ' s children .
You cannot mean that he has even proposed to her again -- yet .
" I am glad you think so ; and the good hands , I hope , may not be wanting ."
Her present home , he could not but observe , was unfavourable to a nervous disorder :-- confined always to one room ;-- he could have wished it otherwise -- and her good aunt , though his very old friend , he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of that description .
Jane ' s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly to occupy her .
Her face was averted from those who had made the attack , and turned towards her aunt .
A fine open sea , he says , and very pure air .
Well , Miss Woodhouse , is he like what you expected ?
Do not be overpowered by such a little tribute of admiration .
I wonder what will become of her !"
I shall , therefore , set off to - morrow .'
madam ," cried Emma , " if other children are at all like what I remember to have been myself , I should think five times the amount of what I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions , dearly earned ."
It was a concern which brought just employment enough .
Is not she an angel in every gesture ?
-- She was afraid she had done her nothing but disservice .-- It was true that she had not to charge herself , in this instance as in the former , with being the sole and original author of the mischief ; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise never have entered Harriet ' s imagination ; for Harriet had acknowledged her admiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had ever given her a hint on the subject ; but she felt completely guilty of having encouraged what she might have repressed .
It was a right thing to do .
I never saw any thing equal to the comfort and style -- Candles everywhere .-- I was telling you of your grandmama , Jane ,-- There was a little disappointment .-- The baked apples and biscuits , excellent in their way , you know ; but there was a delicate fricassee of sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first , and good Mr . Woodhouse , not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough , sent it all out again .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
" And cannot you call me ` George ' now ?"
Not more than five couple could be mustered ; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it very delightful , and she found herself well matched in a partner .
I have not always known their writing apart ."
I was afraid there could be little chance of my hearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to - day ."
I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had been of some use ; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may .
The delightful family party which Emma was securing for herself , poor Harriet must , in mere charitable caution , be kept at a distance from .
" No , no ," said Emma , " it will not reckon low .
you clever creature , that ' s very true .
But Jane , it seems , had a letter from them very lately , and not a word was said about it .
" I have a great curiosity to see Mrs . Elton , I have heard so much of her .
" Poor girl !"
I had no intention , I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes , when I first entered the house .
She could not endure its noise .
I felt that , as to fortune , in all probability he might do much better ; and that as to a rational companion or useful helpmate , he could not do worse .
" He was afraid they should have a very bad drive .
" Oh !
He joined them immediately , and , with scarcely an invitation , seated himself between them .
She had frequently thought -- especially since his father ' s marriage with Miss Taylor -- that if she _were_ to marry , he was the very person to suit her in age , character and condition .
Can it be Neptune ?
No , indeed , Miss Woodhouse , you need not be afraid ; I can sit and admire him now without any great misery .
no -- I am grieved to find -- I was on the point of telling you that when I called at Mrs . Goddard ' s door , which I did the very last thing before I returned to dress , I was told that Miss Smith was not better , by no means better , rather worse .
The others had been talking of the child , Mrs . Weston giving an account of a little alarm she had been under , the evening before , from the infant ' s appearing not quite well .
She then broke the lace off short , and dexterously throwing it into a ditch , was presently obliged to entreat them to stop , and acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort .
When had his influence , such influence begun ?-- When had he succeeded to that place in her affection , which Frank Churchill had once , for a short period , occupied ?-- She looked back ; she compared the two -- compared them , as they had always stood in her estimation , from the time of the latter ' s becoming known to her -- and as they must at any time have been compared by her , had it -- oh !
I say , Jane , what a perfect character you and I should make , if we could be shaken together .
Not to wait upon a bride is very remiss .
CHAPTER XVIII
said Mr . Woodhouse , shaking his head and fixing his eyes on her with tender concern .-- The ejaculation in Emma ' s ear expressed , " Ah !
` If you must go , my dear ,' said I , ` you must , and I will say you are laid down upon the bed .'"
" Do you dare say this ?"
I never could comprehend how Mr . Weston could part with him .
Mr . Knightley had a cheerful manner , which always did him good ; and his many inquiries after " poor Isabella " and her children were answered most satisfactorily .
" I am glad you think I have been useful to her ; but Harriet only wanted drawing out , and receiving a few , very few hints .
Every possibility of good was before me , and the first of blessings secured , in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence .
who can think of Miss Smith , when Miss Woodhouse is near !
I Always take the part of my own sex .
In the course of the spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party -- in which her card - tables should be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packs in the true style -- and more waiters engaged for the evening than their own establishment could furnish , to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper hour , and in the proper order .
" But I am afraid , Mr . Elton , Harriet will not like to sit .
I protest against having paid the smallest attention to any one else .
Now , according to my idea of Mrs . Churchill , it would be most natural , that while she makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband , to whom she owes every thing , while she exercises incessant caprice towards _him_ , she should frequently be governed by the nephew , to whom she owes nothing at all ."
Emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ; that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ; and that Mr . Knightley certainly had not done him justice .
Elton was sitting here , I remember , much about where I am now ."
" I see what a life I am to lead among you .
" I cannot agree with you , papa ; you know I cannot .
He was dining with the Randalls family , and Jane , at the Eltons '; and he had seen a look , more than a single look , at Miss Fairfax , which , from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse , seemed somewhat out of place .
Grandmama was quite well , had a charming evening with Mr . Woodhouse , a vast deal of chat , and backgammon .-- Tea was made downstairs , biscuits and baked apples and wine before she came away : amazing luck in some of her throws : and she inquired a great deal about you , how you were amused , and who were your partners .
Consider from how partial a quarter your information came .
She will break it to you better than I can .
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr . Woodhouse ' s family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughters , but particularly of Emma .
This is all that I can relate of the how , where , and when .
She rose early , and wrote her letter to Harriet ; an employment which left her so very serious , so nearly sad , that Mr . Knightley , in walking up to Hartfield to breakfast , did not arrive at all too soon ; and half an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him , literally and figuratively , was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of the happiness of the evening before .
She is a standing lesson of how to be happy .
You , Miss Woodhouse , I well know , play delightfully .
But hush , hush !"
It was not thrown away on her , she bounded higher than ever , flew farther down the middle , and was in a continual course of smiles .
If Mr . Elton , on his return , made his own indifference as evident and indubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do , she could not imagine Harriet ' s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or the recollection of him .
" So obliging of you !
" Well , I have so little confidence in my own judgment , that whenever I marry , I hope some body will chuse my wife for me .
" My picture !-- But he has left my picture in Bond - street ."
The good was all to myself , by making you an object of the tenderest affection to me .
Emma looked graciously .
I merely called , because I would not pass the door without inquiring after Mrs . Bates ; but I have been so pleasantly detained !
Tea was carrying round , and Mr . Weston , having said all that he wanted , soon took the opportunity of walking away .
Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury , and was restored to the comforts of her beloved home with the Campbells .-- The Mr . Churchills were also in town ; and they were only waiting for November .
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse , and then resumed a more serious , more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been , and might be , and must be .
To Mr . John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject , for the first start of its possibility .
He had made his fortune , bought his house , and obtained his wife ; and was beginning a new period of existence , with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through .
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins ' s name was first mentioned in Highbury , before she was , by some means or other , discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind ; to be handsome , elegant , highly accomplished , and perfectly amiable : and when Mr . Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects , and circulate the fame of her merits , there was very little more for him to do , than to tell her Christian name , and say whose music she principally played .
Or a trident ?
