She was quite one of her worthies -- the most amiable , affable , delightful woman -- just as accomplished and condescending as Mrs . Elton meant to be considered .
Elton ?"
That young man ( speaking lower ) is very thoughtless .
Jane was quite longing to go to Ireland , from his account of things ."
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
She then proceeded to say a good deal more than she felt , of the advantage of such an addition to their confined society in Surry ; the pleasure of looking at somebody new ; the gala - day to Highbury entire , which the sight of him would have made ; and ending with reflections on the Churchills again , found herself directly involved in a disagreement with Mr . Knightley ; and , to her great amusement , perceived that she was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion , and making use of Mrs . Weston ' s arguments against herself .
" Indeed !
But I do not understand how the room at the Crown can be safer for you than your father ' s house ."
Would not Harriet be the very creature described ?
On the contrary , I think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr . Elton as a model .
" Oh !
Emma wished to go to work directly , and therefore produced the portfolio containing her various attempts at portraits , for not one of them had ever been finished , that they might decide together on the best size for Harriet .
" Dear affectionate creature !-- _You_ banished to Abbey - Mill Farm !-- _You_ confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar all your life !
To do what would be most generally pleasing must be our object -- if one could but tell what that would be ."
He certainly might have heard Mr . Elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever done , and Mr . Elton might not be of an imprudent , inconsiderate disposition as to money matters ; he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to them ; but then , Mr . Knightley did not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all interested motives .
Mr . Elton was only too happy .
" Well , papa , if this is not encouragement to marry , I do not know what is .
She has a fault .
I am sure I do not know who is not ."
If he had been anxious for secrecy , he would not have left the paper while I was by ; but he rather pushed it towards me than towards you .
Upon the whole , she was very persuadable ; and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting his comfort -- how certainly Mrs . Goddard , if not Mrs . Bates , might be depended on for bearing him company -- Mr . Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter ' s going out to dinner on a day now near at hand , and spending the whole evening away from him .
Some are gone to the ponds , and some to the lime walk .
" My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring , or summer at farthest ," continued Mrs . Elton ; " and that will be our time for exploring .
Upon my word , Jane on one arm , and me on the other !-- Stop , stop , let us stand a little back , Mrs . Elton is going ; dear Mrs . Elton , how elegant she looks !-- Beautiful lace !-- Now we all follow in her train .
" Oh !
The pain of being obliged to practise concealment towards him , was very little inferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy .
Look at the tree ."
Mrs . Weston looked up , afraid to believe ; but Emma ' s countenance was as steady as her words .
She read , and was surprized .
But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week in January ."
said Emma .
But you see , every thing turns out for the best .
And it is so cheerful a place , that it could not fail of being of use to Mr . Woodhouse ' s spirits , which , I understand , are sometimes much depressed .
I beg your pardon , sir .
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary , indeed , and that she had not a syllable to say for him .
No more is Emma .
Weston ."
It had been a very happy fortnight , and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common course of Hartfield days .
" Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her , or that she admired him ?"
It may make many things intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood .
Any nonsense will serve .
" It might be distressing , for the moment ," said she ; " but you seem to have behaved extremely well ; and it is over -- and may never -- can never , as a first meeting , occur again , and therefore you need not think about it ."
But in time they will .
" It is very unfair to judge of any body ' s conduct , without an intimate knowledge of their situation .
" My dear Jane , what is this I hear ?-- Going to the post - office in the rain !-- This must not be , I assure you .-- You sad girl , how could you do such a thing ?-- It is a sign I was not there to take care of you ."
" Me !"
As for _his_ going , Emma did not wish him to think it possible , the hours would be too late , and the party too numerous .
The power of observation would be soon given -- frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts were in one course .
Mrs . Weston kissed her with tears of joy ; and when she could find utterance , assured her , that this protestation had done her more good than any thing else in the world could do .
By doing it , I shall feel that I am near you .
Always the first person to be thought of !
" But , unfortunately , sir , my time is so limited --"
And ever since she was twelve , Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all .
" And Mrs . Perry and the children , how are they ?
It was felt as such things must be felt .
` Well ,' said she , ` it must be borne some time or other , and it may as well be now .'
Of pride , indeed , there was , perhaps , scarcely enough ; his indifference to a confusion of rank , bordered too much on inelegance of mind .
Frank Churchill had behaved very ill by herself -- very ill in many ways ,-- but it was not so much _his_ behaviour as her _own_ , which made her so angry with him .
A fine open sea , he says , and very pure air .
CHAPTER V
" Quite wrong , my dear aunt ; there is no likeness at all ."
Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr . Elton ' s having dropt a hint .
evil to some is always good to others .
Dear Miss Woodhouse , he would be thirty years old !"
Why does not he try Bath ?-- Indeed he should .
" Nonsense !
Mr . Martin is now awkward and abrupt ; what will he be at Mr . Weston ' s time of life ?"
The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else into the background .
An egg boiled very soft is not unwholesome .
" They would have solicited the honour earlier , but had been waiting the arrival of a folding - screen from London , which they hoped might keep Mr . Woodhouse from any draught of air , and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of his company ."
But ( with a reproachful smile at Emma ) she receives attentions from Mrs . Elton , which nobody else pays her ."
You would have thrown yourself out of all good society .
" No -- Mrs . Knightley ;-- and till she is in being , I will manage such matters myself ."
" A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance , to be married to a respectable , intelligent gentleman - farmer !"
" Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ ," said Frank Churchill , with a smile at Emma , " the person has not chosen ill .
So began Miss Bates ; and Mr . Knightley seemed determined to be heard in his turn , for most resolutely and commandingly did he say ,
The Coles were very respectable in their way , but they ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them .
His gallantry was always on the alert .
Mr . Knightley saw no such passion , and of course thought nothing of its effects ; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming any hesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest ; and more than a reasonable , becoming degree of prudence , she was very sure did not belong to Mr . Elton .
I meant only myself .
Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible , and in her present state , would be dangerous .
Do not pity me till I saw her wan , sick looks .-- I reached Highbury at the time of day when , from my knowledge of their late breakfast hour , I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone .-- I was not disappointed ; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of my journey .
Frank Churchill hardly knows what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax ' s situation in life .
But , however , I found afterwards from Patty , that William said it was all the apples of _that_ sort his master had ; he had brought them all -- and now his master had not one left to bake or boil .
There was a bustle on her approach ; a good deal of moving and talking .
You were very bad with the measles ; that is , you would have been very bad , but for Perry ' s great attention .
continued Mrs . Elton ; " Knightley himself !-- Was not it lucky ?-- for , not being within when he called the other day , I had never seen him before ; and of course , as so particular a friend of Mr . E .' s , I had a great curiosity .
I hope whenever poor Isabella ' s little ones have the measles , she will send for Perry ."
She thought there was an air of greater happiness than usual -- a glow both of complexion and spirits .
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor married .
You persuaded her to refuse him ."
" You are right .
" A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance , to be married to a respectable , intelligent gentleman - farmer !"
Mrs . Elton , very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her by such a hope , smiled most graciously .
I assure you it has been the greatest satisfaction , comfort , and delight to me , to hear what a musical society I am got into .
Henry is the eldest , he was named after me , not after his father .
Mrs . Weston was the object of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem .
I shall leave you together .
