" Very true ," he gravely replied ; " it was very bad ."
He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter , full of professions and falsehoods , and persuade himself that he has hit upon the very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventing his father ' s having any right to complain .
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way -- just across the lawn ; and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put me so exactly in mind !
Where features were indifferent , a fine complexion gave beauty to them all ; and where they were good , the effect was -- fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect was .
I had quite determined to go away again ."
" Say nothing , my dear Emma , while you oblige me to read -- not even of Mrs . Elton .
Without scruple -- without apology -- without much apparent diffidence , Mr . Elton , the lover of Harriet , was professing himself _her_ lover .
CHAPTER XIII
Pray take care , Miss Woodhouse , ours is rather a dark staircase -- rather darker and narrower than one could wish .
cried Mr . Knightley .
And how could it possibly come into your head ?"
My being saved from pain is a very secondary consideration .
Emma could not think it too soon ; for with all his good and agreeable qualities , there was a sort of parade in his speeches which was very apt to incline her to laugh .
A walk before breakfast does me good ."
Little Henry was in her thoughts , and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made her irresolute what else to say .
" I agree with you exactly .
We must bring her forward .
Emma agreed to it , and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet ' s account , which she could not give any sincere explanation of .
You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_ ."
The most indefatigable , true friend .
The laurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here , and stand very much in the same way -- just across the lawn ; and I had a glimpse of a fine large tree , with a bench round it , which put me so exactly in mind !
Well , I was persuaded there were two .
I am sure of your kind support and aid ."
You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into .
He did not boast , but it naturally betrayed itself , that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing , and on her laughing and noticing it , he owned that he believed ( excepting one or two points ) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing .
" Very beautiful , indeed ," replied Emma ; and she spoke so kindly , that he gratefully burst out ,
Something really important seemed announced by his looks ; but , as her friend was well , she endeavoured not to be uneasy , and settling it with her father , that she would take her walk now , she and Mr . Weston were soon out of the house together and on their way at a quick pace for Randalls .
However , _I_ shall always think it a very pleasant party , and feel extremely obliged to the kind friends who included me in it ."
I shall not discuss it here .
Nobody could nurse her , as we should do ."
" And I , Mr . Knightley , am equally stout in my confidence of its not doing them any harm .
" I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple ."
Emma watched and decided , that with such feelings as were now shewn , it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself ; that he had not been acting a part , or making a parade of insincere professions ; and that Mr . Knightley certainly had not done him justice .
The only way of proving it , however , will be to turn to our maps .
Sometimes Mr . Elton predominated , sometimes the Martins ; and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other .
Did you ever hear of that ?-- A water party ; and by some accident she was falling overboard .
She might talk on ; and if he wanted to say any thing himself , he would only talk louder , and drown her voice .
There was a communication before her , one which _she_ only could be competent to make -- the confession of her engagement to her father ; but she would have nothing to do with it at present .-- She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs . Weston were safe and well .
She could not be too soon alarmed , nor send for Perry too often .
replied he .
" Oh !
Here Mr . Weston joined them , and on hearing what was proposed , gave it his decided approbation .
But ah !
Read it in comfort to yourself .
Such kind friends , you know , Miss Woodhouse , one must always find agreeable , though every body seemed rather fagged after the morning ' s party .
" How delighted I am to see you again !
I dare say he will come in when he knows who is here .
I was reading it to Mrs . Cole , and since she went away , I was reading it again to my mother , for it is such a pleasure to her -- a letter from Jane -- that she can never hear it often enough ; so I knew it could not be far off , and here it is , only just under my huswife -- and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says ;-- but , first of all , I really must , in justice to Jane , apologise for her writing so short a letter -- only two pages you see -- hardly two -- and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half .
Had she left her where she ought , and where he had told her she ought !-- Had she not , with a folly which no tongue could express , prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable in the line of life to which she ought to belong -- all would have been safe ; none of this dreadful sequel would have been .
Her ignorance is hourly flattery .
To that point went every leisure moment which her father ' s claims on her allowed , and every moment of involuntary absence of mind .
A very friendly shake of the hand , a very earnest " Good - bye ," closed the speech , and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill .
" I like your plan ," cried Mr . Weston .
I must love him ; and now that I am satisfied on one point , the one material point , I am sincerely anxious for its all turning out well , and ready to hope that it may .
" Oh yes !-- there is a great difference .
He only means --"
" About Jane Fairfax .
" Perhaps it is as well ," said Frank Churchill , as he attended Emma to her carriage .
I believe I did not play with the children quite so much as usual .
At ten years old , she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen .
Much better employed talking to the young ladies .
" But you will come again ," said Emma .
Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at every turn .
She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict .
" Have you indeed , sir ?-- Bless me !
" Your gallantry is really unanswerable .
perfectly .
We have notice of it in a letter to - day .
A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at breakfast , and he had sent for a chaise and set off , intending to return to dinner , but with no more important view that appeared than having his hair cut .
Their first pause was at the Crown Inn , an inconsiderable house , though the principal one of the sort , where a couple of pair of post - horses were kept , more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any run on the road ; and his companions had not expected to be detained by any interest excited there ; but in passing it they gave the history of the large room visibly added ; it had been built many years ago for a ball - room , and while the neighbourhood had been in a particularly populous , dancing state , had been occasionally used as such ;-- but such brilliant days had long passed away , and now the highest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist club established among the gentlemen and half - gentlemen of the place .
The thing is determined , that is ( laughing affectedly ) as far as I can presume to determine any thing without the concurrence of my lord and master .
Nobody talked about it .
I wanted to know a little more , and this tells me quite enough .
It may be possible to do without dancing entirely .
" I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax ," said Emma .
I left them there and came on to Hartfield , impatient for your opinion , and hoping you might be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot .
She promised , however , to think of it ; and pretty nearly promised , moreover , to think of it , with the intention of finding it a very good scheme .
" Yes , certainly it does .
She hoped no one could have said to her , " How could you be so unfeeling to your father ?-- I must , I will tell you truths while I can ."
She was short , plump , and fair , with a fine bloom , blue eyes , light hair , regular features , and a look of great sweetness , and , before the end of the evening , Emma was as much pleased with her manners as her person , and quite determined to continue the acquaintance .
Have not I some right to complain ?
Half a dozen natural children , perhaps -- and poor Frank cut off !-- This , though very undesirable , would be no matter of agony to her .
" One more ;-- they would not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account , and would only ask for one more ."
But at last there seemed a perverse turn ; it seemed all at once as if he were more afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account , than on Harriet ' s -- more anxious that she should escape the infection , than that there should be no infection in the complaint .
It is a necessary of life to me ; and having always been used to a very musical society , both at Maple Grove and in Bath , it would have been a most serious sacrifice .
Mr . Weston , on his side , added a virtue to the account which must have some weight .
" And if you find them troublesome , you must send them home again ."
Oh no ; we all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apart , and were sure of meeting every day ."
A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole .
" Oh !
Mr . Woodhouse could never allow for Mr . Knightley ' s claims on his brother , or any body ' s claims on Isabella , except his own .
Harriet certainly was not clever , but she had a sweet , docile , grateful disposition , was totally free from conceit , and only desiring to be guided by any one she looked up to .
For the present , he could not be spared , to his " very great mortification and regret ; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at no distant period ."
Either because he did not dance himself , or because the plan had been formed without his being consulted , he seemed resolved that it should not interest him , determined against its exciting any present curiosity , or affording him any future amusement .
The apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking , beyond a doubt ; all from Donwell -- some of Mr . Knightley ' s most liberal supply .
Jane , don ' t you remember grandmama ' s telling us of it when we got home ?
She must wait a moment , or he would think her mad .
Would not Harriet be the very creature described ?
They went in ; and while the sleek , well - tied parcels of " Men ' s Beavers " and " York Tan " were bringing down and displaying on the counter , he said --" But I beg your pardon , Miss Woodhouse , you were speaking to me , you were saying something at the very moment of this burst of my _amor_ _patriae_ .
he is off .
