Who had been at pains to give Harriet notions of self - consequence but herself ?-- Who but herself had taught her , that she was to elevate herself if possible , and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment ?-- If Harriet , from being humble , were grown vain , it was her doing too .
Escape , however , was not his plan .
My Emma , does not every thing serve to prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with each other ?"
I admired your spirit ; and I dare say we shall get home very well .
They are known to no human being , I guess , but herself .
" No , no , you must not ; you shall not , indeed ."
You may guess how readily he came into my wishes ; and having his approbation , I made my way directly to Miss Bates , to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took us home ; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once .
When she took in her history , indeed , her situation , as well as her beauty ; when she considered what all this elegance was destined to , what she was going to sink from , how she was going to live , it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect ; especially , if to every well - known particular entitling her to interest , were added the highly probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr . Dixon , which she had so naturally started to herself .
say beautiful rather .
Anywhere , so that Jane is not in a draught .
And she talked in this way so long and successfully that , when forced to give her attention again to her father and sister , she had nothing worse to hear than Isabella ' s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax ; and Jane Fairfax , though no great favourite with her in general , she was at that moment very happy to assist in praising .
There was no occasion to press the matter farther .
Do not you pity me ?"
cried Emma , " this has been a most unfortunate -- most deplorable mistake !-- What is to be done ?"
We must go in the carriage , to be sure ."
And that is all that I can recollect of it -- but it is very clever all the way through .
how could it be ?-- Then I must have dreamt it -- but I was completely persuaded -- Miss Smith , you walk as if you were tired .
" And now we shall just miss them ; too provoking !-- I do not know when I have been so disappointed ."
The scene enlarged ; two persons appeared ; Mrs . Weston and her son - in - law ; they were walking into Highbury ;-- to Hartfield of course .
yes "-- he replied ; " I was just going to mention it .
He had told her that he could not allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield , as he was to be at home by the middle of the day .
Cole ."
Isabella then went to Emma ; but Emma could not so entirely give up the hope of their being all able to get away ; and they were still discussing the point , when Mr . Knightley , who had left the room immediately after his brother ' s first report of the snow , came back again , and told them that he had been out of doors to examine , and could answer for there not being the smallest difficulty in their getting home , whenever they liked it , either now or an hour hence .
.
it is no difficulty to see who you take after !
cried Miss Bates .
We shall know more about them all , in half an hour , from you , than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year ."
Richard ?-- I saw you the other day as you rode through the town -- Mrs . Otway , I protest !-- and good Mr . Otway , and Miss Otway and Miss Caroline .-- Such a host of friends !-- and Mr . George and Mr .
Will you chuse a wife for me ?-- I am sure I should like any body fixed on by you .
" Oh !
She had not deserved it ; she had often been negligent or perverse , slighting his advice , or even wilfully opposing him , insensible of half his merits , and quarrelling with him because he would not acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own -- but still , from family attachment and habit , and thorough excellence of mind , he had loved her , and watched over her from a girl , with an endeavour to improve her , and an anxiety for her doing right , which no other creature had at all shared .
She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all the discipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite .-- Harriet rational , Frank Churchill not too much in love , and Mr . Knightley not wanting to quarrel with her , how very happy a summer must be before her !
What strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , was another point ; but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; and this persuasion , joined to all the rest , made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him , in spite of every previous determination against it .
Good soul !
Dinner was on table .-- Mrs .
What are they saying about Mr .
They had gone , in short -- and very great had been the evident distress and confusion of the lady .
said she : " did you ever sit for your picture ?"
Weston ."
Her looks and words had nothing to restrain them .
He rode down for a couple of hours ; he could not yet do more ; but as he came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield , she could then exercise all her quick observation , and speedily determine how he was influenced , and how she must act .
It was but an effusion of lively spirits .
that I had been satisfied with persuading her not to accept young Martin .
One feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance .
" I wish we had a donkey .
Not that I think Mr . Martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education -- and been very well brought up .
By doing it , I shall feel that I am near you .
Though , perhaps , as the _Chaperon_ of the party -- _I_ never was in any circle -- exploring parties -- young ladies -- married women --"
Mr . Weston was a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self - denying , generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match ; but it was a black morning ' s work for her .
She did not really like her .
I cannot be so sanguine as Mr . Weston .
In this age of literature , such collections on a very grand scale are not uncommon .
There was no getting at her real opinion .
She could not respect his eye , but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable .
Oh !
Dinner was on table .-- Mrs .
" Ah !
Look at her .
Oh !-- you need not be afraid of owning it to me , for Mr . Weston has told me himself .
Emma found that she must wait ; and now it required little effort .
Emma was sure he had not forgiven her ; he looked unlike himself .
If any thing , you are too attentive .
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look ; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be charmed .-- There was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
At first it was downright dulness to Emma .
Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all !
CHAPTER IX
She inherits her mother ' s talents , and must have been under subjection to her ."
of Mr .
I would rather not be tempted .
Not one of them had the power of removal , or of effecting any material change of society .
" Not at all .
We hear of him for ever at some watering - place or other .
If there had not been so much anger , there would have been desperate awkwardness ; but their straightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment .
" Nay , why do you ?"
I wonder you should think it possible for me to have such feelings .
There was no immediate appearance .
She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella ' s invitation ; and she was fortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it , without resorting to invention .-- There was a tooth amiss .
" For the present , the whole affair was to be completely a secret .
-- And Emma distinctly heard him add , in a lower tone , before he quitted the room ,--" I have been as good as my word .
" Brother and sister !
" Why should you caution me ?-- You do not think I care about Mr . Frank Churchill ."
Emma must do Harriet good : and by supplying her with a new object of interest , Harriet may be said to do Emma good .
I have done with match - making indeed .
" I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her .
Then she is no rule for Mrs . Churchill , who is as thorough a fine lady as any body ever beheld ."
Was it new for one , perhaps too busy to seek , to be the prize of a girl who would seek him ?-- Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal , inconsistent , incongruous -- or for chance and circumstance ( as second causes ) to direct the human fate ?
" There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart ," said she afterwards to herself .
Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings .
Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting ; but still they were to part .
Early , I know , you had none ."
Miss Woodhouse , how kind you are !-- I suppose you have heard -- and are come to give us joy .
She is a woman that one may , that one _must_ laugh at ; but that one would not wish to slight .
Decidedly , I think , a very gentleman - like man ."
I planned the match from that hour ; and when such success has blessed me in this instance , dear papa , you cannot think that I shall leave off match - making ."
Harriet listened submissively , and said " it was very true -- it was just as Miss Woodhouse described -- it was not worth while to think about them -- and she would not think about them any longer " but no change of subject could avail , and the next half - hour saw her as anxious and restless about the Eltons as before .
She was so eager to have them drawn that I could not refuse ; but there is no making children of three or four years old stand still you know ; nor can it be very easy to take any likeness of them , beyond the air and complexion , unless they are coarser featured than any of mama ' s children ever were .
The whole party walked about , and looked , and praised again ; and then , having nothing else to do , formed a sort of half - circle round the fire , to observe in their various modes , till other subjects were started , that , though _May_ , a fire in the evening was still very pleasant .
Mr . Weston -- ( laughing affectedly ) I must protest against that .-- A most dangerous precedent indeed !-- I beg you will not let your neighbours follow your example .-- Upon my word , if this is what I am to expect , we married women must begin to exert ourselves !-- Oh !
cried Emma feelingly .
" Ah !
