Something of a very unpleasant nature , I find , has occurred ;-- do let me know directly what it is .
united , what reverse we have !
The fact is , I suppose , that she is tired of Enscombe .
" None ; not one .
" Yes -- I _have_ called there ; passing the door , I thought it better .
He gave her to understand that Frank admired her extremely -- thought her very beautiful and very charming ; and with so much to be said for him altogether , she found she must not judge him harshly .
" No , no ; your room is full enough .
The young man had been the first admirer , but she trusted there was no other hold , and that there would be no serious difficulty , on Harriet ' s side , to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own .
While I , to blind the world to our engagement , was behaving one hour with objectionable particularity to another woman , was she to be consenting the next to a proposal which might have made every previous caution useless ?-- Had we been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury , the truth must have been suspected .-- I was mad enough , however , to resent .-- I doubted her affection .
Jane will be only four miles from Maple Grove ."
Well , time does fly indeed !-- and my memory is very bad .
This is a connexion which offers nothing but good .
" How you can bear such recollections , is astonishing to me !-- They _will_ sometimes obtrude -- but how you can court them !"
I was reading it to Mrs . Cole , and since she went away , I was reading it again to my mother , for it is such a pleasure to her -- a letter from Jane -- that she can never hear it often enough ; so I knew it could not be far off , and here it is , only just under my huswife -- and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what she says ;-- but , first of all , I really must , in justice to Jane , apologise for her writing so short a letter -- only two pages you see -- hardly two -- and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half .
Nothing wanting .
I am sure you must have been struck by his awkward look and abrupt manner , and the uncouthness of a voice which I heard to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here ."
What shall I say ?"
I was introducing her into good company , and giving her the opportunity of pleasing some one worth having ; I ought not to have attempted more .
I honestly said as much to Mr . E . when he was speaking of my future home , and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable ; and the inferiority of the house too -- knowing what I had been accustomed to -- of course he was not wholly without apprehension .
Mrs . Weston told me you were here .-- Oh !
a man does not imagine any such thing .
Such a sad loss to our party to - day !"
she cried .--" Well !"
" Dear Emma bears every thing so well ," said her father .
Now will be the time .
The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy , and of powerful operation ; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyes unclosed , they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighter hope .
She was proved to have been universally mistaken ; and she had not quite done nothing -- for she had done mischief .
I am sure they will bring him soon ."
It was an awkward ceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits , and a man had need be all grace to acquit himself well through it .
said Emma , laughing .
She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt Jane Fairfax ' s feelings ; and they followed the other ladies out of the room , arm in arm , with an appearance of good - will highly becoming to the beauty and grace of each .
And touching Miss Bates , who at that moment passed near --" Miss Bates , are you mad , to let your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner ?
Emma found it really time to be at home ; the visit had already lasted long ; and on examining watches , so much of the morning was perceived to be gone , that Mrs . Weston and her companion taking leave also , could allow themselves only to walk with the two young ladies to Hartfield gates , before they set off for Randalls .
" She is not entirely without it , I think ."
By your account , he does seem to have had some scruples .
I thought I had seen you first in February ."
There is my sister ; and really quite her own little elegant figure !-- and the face not unlike .
" Mrs . Cole has servants to send .
He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be occasioned by no housekeeper ' s room , or a bad butler ' s pantry , but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy , and that whenever he were attached , he would willingly give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment .
exclaimed Mr . Knightley loudly and warmly ; and with calmer asperity , added , a few moments afterwards , " No , he is not her equal indeed , for he is as much her superior in sense as in situation .
" I know nothing of the large parties of London , sir -- I never dine with any body ."
said John Knightley .
He was invited to contribute any really good enigmas , charades , or conundrums that he might recollect ; and she had the pleasure of seeing him most intently at work with his recollections ; and at the same time , as she could perceive , most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant , nothing that did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass his lips .
what a bloom of full health , and such a pretty height and size ; such a firm and upright figure !
She might do very well by herself .
He was coming through the hall .
This , on his side , might merely proceed from her not being thought of ; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it to delicacy , and a suspicion , from some appearances , that their friendship were declining .
" Emma ," said Mr . Knightley presently , " I have a piece of news for you .
Here , she must be leading a life of privation and penance ; there it would have been all enjoyment .
You and I need not be afraid .
Mrs . Weston had been speaking to her at the same moment .
Mrs . Elton had received notice of it that morning , and was in raptures .
I have no thoughts of matrimony at present ."
So unlike what a man should be !-- None of that upright integrity , that strict adherence to truth and principle , that disdain of trick and littleness , which a man should display in every transaction of his life ."
I think , Miss Woodhouse , you and I must establish a musical club , and have regular weekly meetings at your house , or ours .
" But every thing of that kind ," said Emma , " will soon be in so regular a train --"
My dear Emma , suppose we all have a little gruel ."
Not that she _wanted_ him to marry .
" On the misery of what she had suffered , during the concealment of so many months ," continued Mrs . Weston , " she was energetic .
" I did ," replied Emma , " and they cannot forgive me ."
" I will say no more about him ," cried Emma , " you turn every thing to evil .
She believed she had been foolish , but it had alarmed her , and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr . Perry .
You know , my dear , she is going to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor was to us .
And I am not only , not going to be married , at present , but have very little intention of ever marrying at all ."
" You are silent , Miss Fairfax -- but I hope you mean to take an interest in this news .
The lovers were standing together at one of the windows .
" Proof indeed !"
But his spirits were soon rising again , and with laughing eyes , after mentioning the expected return of the Campbells , he named the name of Dixon .-- Emma blushed , and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing .
Miss Bates , deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner , did not immediately catch her meaning ; but , when it burst on her , it could not anger , though a slight blush shewed that it could pain her .
Mrs . Cole had many to agree with her ; every body who spoke on the subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell , and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made ; and there were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way , and still listen to Mrs . Cole .
I do suspect that he is not really necessary to my happiness .
He thought it very well done of Mr . Knightley to invite them -- very kind and sensible -- much cleverer than dining out .-- He was not fond of dining out ."
Mrs . Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa .
He had misinterpreted the feelings which had kept her face averted , and her tongue motionless .
She must not flatter herself that he thought of her dancing , but if he were criticising her behaviour , she did not feel afraid .
And , in fact , you have heard all the essential already .
They are but too apt to give up music ."
" You , sir , may say any thing ," cried Mr . Elton , " but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought , the placing of Miss Smith out of doors ; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit !
" He did .
There must be three months , at least , of deep mourning ; but when they are over , I imagine there will be nothing more to wait for ."
I do admire your patriotism .
very delightful indeed ; I can say nothing less , for I suppose Miss Woodhouse and Mr . Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes .
He is so very superior .
But you had better go with Mrs . Weston and hear the instrument ."
Had the same behaviour continued , Miss Smith might have been led into a misconception of your views ; not being aware , probably , any more than myself , of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of .
This discovery laid many smaller matters open .
he is off .
They never could have been all three together , without her having stabbed Jane Fairfax ' s peace in a thousand instances ; and on Box Hill , perhaps , it had been the agony of a mind that would bear no more .
She would be very glad to stay ."
It did her no service however .
Emma could not suppose any such thing , knowing as she did , that both the Mr . Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself ;-- and two basins only were ordered .
Always the first person to be thought of !
She had not advanced many yards from Mrs . Goddard ' s door , when she was met by Mr . Elton himself , evidently coming towards it , and as they walked on slowly together in conversation about the invalid -- of whom he , on the rumour of considerable illness , had been going to inquire , that he might carry some report of her to Hartfield -- they were overtaken by Mr . John Knightley returning from the daily visit to Donwell , with his two eldest boys , whose healthy , glowing faces shewed all the benefit of a country run , and seemed to ensure a quick despatch of the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for .
The mistake had been slight .
" Yes , they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London .
Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings did not come ?
" I saw her answer !-- nothing could be clearer ."
I honestly said as much to Mr . E . when he was speaking of my future home , and expressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable ; and the inferiority of the house too -- knowing what I had been accustomed to -- of course he was not wholly without apprehension .
These were her reasons -- she had no better .
Frank turned instantly to Emma , to claim her former promise ; and boasted himself an engaged man , which his father looked his most perfect approbation of -- and it then appeared that Mrs . Weston was wanting _him_ to dance with Mrs . Elton himself , and that their business was to help to persuade him into it , which was done pretty soon .-- Mr . Weston and Mrs . Elton led the way , Mr . Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed .
