Were she your equal in situation -- but , Emma , consider how far this is from being the case .
I wish her extremely well : and , no doubt , there are men who might not object to -- Every body has their level : but as for myself , I am not , I think , quite so much at a loss .
There was consciousness , animation , and warmth ; there was every thing which her countenance or manner could ever have wanted .-- She came forward with an offered hand ; and said , in a low , but very feeling tone ,
" I always told you she was -- a little ; but you will soon overcome all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome , all that has its foundation in diffidence .
-- ` I can see nobody ,' said she ; and up she got , and would go away ; and that was what made us keep you waiting -- and extremely sorry and ashamed we were .
To give up one ' s child !
They were stopping , however , in the first place at Mrs . Bates ' s ; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford ' s ; and had all but knocked , when Emma caught their eye .-- Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the agreeableness of yesterday ' s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
Look !
It is on her account that attention to Randalls is doubly due , and she must doubly feel the omission .
We will follow them to Hartfield .
She restrained herself , however , from any of the reproofs she could have given , and only thanked Mrs . Elton coolly ; " but their going to Bath was quite out of the question ; and she was not perfectly convinced that the place might suit her better than her father ."
You said you had a great many , and now you have not one left .
CHAPTER I
" The post - office is a wonderful establishment !"
Well , I wish them happy with all my heart .
Nothing , but to grow more worthy of him , whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own .
In the present instance , it was sickness and poverty together which she came to visit ; and after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or advice , she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the scene as made her say to Harriet , as they walked away ,
She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison , while a sharer of his conversation with her friend ; and from the best , the purest of motives , might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland , and resolving to divide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning her career of laborious duty .
You see how delightfully she writes .
" That has been a good deal the case , my dear ; but not to the degree you mention .
It is very plain that he considers the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side , but that he is not without hope of my growing , in time , as worthy of your affection , as you think me already .
He gave her to understand that Frank admired her extremely -- thought her very beautiful and very charming ; and with so much to be said for him altogether , she found she must not judge him harshly .
And putting up her hand to screen her words from Emma --" A congratulatory visit , you know .-- Oh !
" Oh , what a sweet house !-- How very beautiful !-- There are the yellow curtains that Miss Nash admires so much ."
She was then interrupted by Harriet ' s coming in ; and if Harriet ' s praise could have satisfied her , she might soon have been comforted .
It was her own choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury ; to spend , perhaps , her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whom she was so very dear : and the Campbells , whatever might be their motive or motives , whether single , or double , or treble , gave the arrangement their ready sanction , and said , that they depended more on a few months spent in her native air , for the recovery of her health , than on any thing else .
There will be but one subject throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury ; but one interest -- one object of curiosity ; it will be all Mr . Frank Churchill ; we shall think and speak of nobody else ."
" My dear , dear anxious friend ,"-- said she , in mental soliloquy , while walking downstairs from her own room , " always overcareful for every body ' s comfort but your own ; I see you now in all your little fidgets , going again and again into his room , to be sure that all is right ."
You are too obliging , my dear Miss Woodhouse ; but we really must take leave .
It cannot be long , I think , before she comes ."
If all took place that might take place among the circle of her friends , Hartfield must be comparatively deserted ; and she left to cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happiness .
" Was he handsome ?"
It is a very cold afternoon -- but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter .-- Ha !
" She must be very lively , and have hazle eyes .
" That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast , of my present perfect indifference ," she continued , " I will farther tell you , that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance , when I did like him , when I was very much disposed to be attached to him -- nay , was attached -- and how it came to cease , is perhaps the wonder .
He thought much of the evils of the journey for her , and not a little of the fatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party the last half of the way ; but his alarms were needless ; the sixteen miles being happily accomplished , and Mr . and Mrs . John Knightley , their five children , and a competent number of nursery - maids , all reaching Hartfield in safety .
They met with the utmost friendliness .
What a thinking brain you have !
There will not be time for any thing ."
" Oh !"
no , the meeting is certainly to - day ," was the abrupt answer , which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs . Elton ' s side .-- " I do believe ," she continued , " this is the most troublesome parish that ever was .
His letters disgust me ."
My mother often wonders that I can make it out so well .
It was a style of beauty , of which elegance was the reigning character , and as such , she must , in honour , by all her principles , admire it :-- elegance , which , whether of person or of mind , she saw so little in Highbury .
Walk home !-- you are prettily shod for walking home , I dare say .
I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill ; when , provoked by such conduct on my side , such shameful , insolent neglect of her , and such apparent devotion to Miss W ., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense to endure , she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me .-- In short , my dear madam , it was a quarrel blameless on her side , abominable on mine ; and I returned the same evening to Richmond , though I might have staid with you till the next morning , merely because I would be as angry with her as possible .
" Especially when _one_ of those two is such a fanciful , troublesome creature !"
" I know nothing of the large parties of London , sir -- I never dine with any body ."
" So unreasonably early !"
" Well , and that is as early as most men can afford to marry , who are not born to an independence .
He told her the news .
" I honour his sincerity .
" Then , my dear Isabella , it is the most extraordinary sort of thing in the world , for in general every thing does give you cold .
" Only think of our happening to meet him !-- How very odd !
You and Miss Smith , and Miss Fairfax , will be three , and the two Miss Coxes five ; and for five couple there will be plenty of room ."
How will a conundrum reckon ?"
Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from their knowing each other , which had taken strong possession of her mind , had ever crossed his ; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks of acquiescence , or proofs of defiance .
She had never been admitted before to be seriously ill .
Miss Woodhouse , what a pity that I must not write this beautiful charade into my book !
Her views of improving her little friend ' s mind , by a great deal of useful reading and conversation , had never yet led to more than a few first chapters , and the intention of going on to - morrow .
Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr . Martin ' s prose .
And touching Miss Bates , who at that moment passed near --" Miss Bates , are you mad , to let your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner ?
Mrs . Elton was first seen at church : but though devotion might be interrupted , curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew , and it must be left for the visits in form which were then to be paid , to settle whether she were very pretty indeed , or only rather pretty , or not pretty at all .
" And when ," thought Emma , " will there be a beginning of Mr .
This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days .
And there was time enough for Emma to form a reasonable judgment , as their visit included all the rest of the morning .
She would not be ashamed of the appearance of the penitence , so justly and truly hers .
" But I thought you would .
" We want only two more to be just the right number .
said Frank Churchill , as soon as they were out of hearing :--" How well they suit one another !-- Very lucky -- marrying as they did , upon an acquaintance formed only in a public place !-- They only knew each other , I think , a few weeks in Bath !
It did assist ; for though he began with grave looks and short questions , he was soon led on to talk of them all in the usual way , and to take the child out of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity .
He reads the Agricultural Reports , and some other books that lay in one of the window seats -- but he reads all _them_ to himself .
."
How trifling they make every thing else appear !-- I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day ; and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ?"
Soon after this Miss Bates came in , and Emma could not help being diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself , resulting , she supposed , from doubt of what might be said , and impatience to say every thing .
CHAPTER XVII
We must look to her one fault , and remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement , to bear that she should have been in such a state of punishment ."
" She has had the advantage , you know , of practising on me ," she continued --" like La Baronne d ' Almane on La Comtesse d ' Ostalis , in Madame de Genlis ' Adelaide and Theodore , and we shall now see her own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan ."
I hope they are quite well .
As an old friend , you will allow me to hope , Miss Fairfax , that ten years hence you may have as many concentrated objects as I have ."
These were very cheering thoughts ; and the sight of a great deal of snow on the ground did her further service , for any thing was welcome that might justify their all three being quite asunder at present .
Weston ."
A mind lively and at ease , can do with seeing nothing , and can see nothing that does not answer .
" Oh !
It was a pity that she had not come back earlier !
I dared not address her openly ; my difficulties in the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to require definition ; and I was fortunate enough to prevail , before we parted at Weymouth , and to induce the most upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret engagement .-- Had she refused , I should have gone mad .-- But you will be ready to say , what was your hope in doing this ?-- What did you look forward to ?-- To any thing , every thing -- to time , chance , circumstance , slow effects , sudden bursts , perseverance and weariness , health and sickness .
They will be so very happy to see you ."
" No , I fancy not ," replied Mrs . Elton , with a most satisfied smile ."
That was the kind action ; that was the noble benevolence and generosity ; that was the service which made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being upon earth ."
" It is a very simple story .
One does not , you know , after a time .
Do you think it is a good one ?
Many circumstances assisted the temptation .
" It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it ," said the young man , " though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far ; but in coming _home_ I felt I might do any thing ."
" Indeed I will .
" It was short -- merely to announce -- but cheerful , exulting , of course ."
He had said that Jane Fairfax received attentions from Mrs . Elton which nobody else paid her .
Now , if your friends have any gratitude , they will say something pretty loud about you and me in return ; but I cannot stay to hear it ."
He seemed to me very well off as he was .
A better written letter , Harriet ( returning it ,) than I had expected ."
